The son of Dasaratha, firm in his vows, listened to the inspiring words of the Sage Vishvamitra, which filled him with ardour, and with joined palms he humbly addressed him:—

“To fulfil the commands of my royal sire and to honour his promise, I deem it my duty to act according to your instructions without hesitation. My father, the emperor, at the time of my departure from Ayodhya bade me carry out your injunctions—O Muni, I shall honour them. I am prepared to execute your commands, O Rishi, because it will lead to the benefit of the brahmins and the king, and will also bring happiness to the people of this land.”

Having spoken thus, Shri Rama grasped his bow and, twanging the string, filled all the cardinal points with the sound. The denizens of the forest were terrified, and Taraka was overcome with helpless rage. Full of wrath that yakshini ran in the direction from which the sound came and Shri Ramacandra beholding that gigantic and misshapen monster was incensed and said to Lakshmana: “O Brother, behold this fearful yakshini of formidable size, whose veiy aspect would strike terror into timorous hearts. See, O Lakshmana, how I shall cut off her ears and nose and put her to flight! She is horrible, versed in black magic and hard to subdue, but it is not proper to deprive a woman of her life. A woman is worthy of protection, therefore, I shall incapacitate her, by depriving her of the power of motion thus preventing her from doing further mischief.”

While Shri Rama was still speaking, the dreadful Taraka ran towards him roaring with uplifted arms. The Rishi Vishvamitra approaching her encouraged Rama, with a shout, crying, “Jai to the descendant of Raghu”. Notwithstanding, Taraka raised a thick cloud of dust and for a while Shri Rama and Lakshmana could see nothing. Then the yakshini by the power of magic caused a shower of rocks to rain on the two brothers and Rama was now filled with wrath. Parrying the rain of rocks and advancing towards her, he cut off both her hands. Then Shri Lakshmana severed the nose and ears of the asuri who had already been deprived of her hands. Assuming various forms, she tried to deceive the princes by vanishing away. Then from her hiding place, she showered heavy rocks on them, and a rain of stones fell on every side.

Shri Vishvamitra, who stood watching the combat, now cried: “Enough, she does not deserve further mercy; should’st you spare her, she will gain strength through her magic powers and will again break up our holy rites. The evening is approaching and in the evening rakshasas are overcome with difficulty; slay her, therefore, without delay.”

Then Shri Vishvamitra pointed out the concealed yakshini to Rama, who drew from his quiver arrows capable of following sound and surrounded her with them. The powerful female demon, an adept in occult powers, encompassed by the rain of arrows, advanced roaring, towards the princes. With an arrow, Shri Rama pierced the heart of the wicked yakshini, who fell to the ground and expired. Seeing the terrible yakshini slain, Indra and other celestial beings worshipped Shri Rama, crying: “Well done, well done, O Holy Rama!” All the gods filled with joy, said to Shri Vishvamitra: “O Muni, may prosperity attend you, Indra and the gods are gratified with Shri Ramacandra’s feat of arms, show your special favour to him and deliver to him the two kinds of weapons, natural and supernatural, belonging to Krishashva. Present Shri Ramacandra, who is worthy to receive them, with all the other mighty weapons, he is wholly devoted to you; these two princes are destined to achieve great things.”

Having uttered these words, the gods bowed down to the Sage Vishvamitra and returned to their abode.

Evening fell, and the holy sage gladdened by the slaying of the wicked Taraka by Shri Rama, smelt the head of the prince and addressed him thus: “O Rama, this night we will remain here and to-morrow morning proceed to my hermitage.”

Shri Rama rejoiced to hear the muni’s words and rested happily during the night in the forest.

On the day that Taraka was slain, the forest, freed from the curse, adorned with champaka, ashoka, mango and other trees, looked as charming as the forest of Citraratha.

Shri Ramacandra, whom the siddhas praised for slaying Taraka, passed the night in the forest, awaiting the dawn.