When the king attended by the holy Ganga, reached the seashore, he entered the subterranean region where the sons of King Sagara had been burnt to ashes.

“O Rama, as the holy water flowed over the ashes, Shri Brahma the Lord of all the worlds, addressed King Bhagiratha as follows:

‘O Great King, you have redeemed the sixty thousand sons of King Sagara, who now dwell in the heavenly region. O King, as long as the waters of the sea continue on earth, so long shall the sons of King Sagara in celestial form enjoy heaven. Henceforth, O Great Sovereign, Shri Ganga shall be your eldest daughter and be known by your name throughout the earth. This sacred river shall be named Shri Ganga, Tripathaga and Bhagirathi.

“‘O King, perform the funeral rites of thine ancestors and fulfil your prescribed duty. The mighty King Sagara was not able to accomplish this purpose and King Amshuman of limitless prowess also failed to obtain the fulfilment of his devout desire. Your father Dilipa, equal to ourselves in merit and a warrior fully established in the duties of his caste, that illustrious Dilipa besought the holy Ganga to descend to earth in vain. This great design has been accomplished by you alone. You have acquired undying renown throughout the world.

“‘By achieving this, you are possessed of the highest dharma. O Great Sovereign, now do you bathe in the holy stream also. O Lion among men, purify thyself and acquire merit, then perform the funeral rites of thine ancestors. O King, may prosperity attend you, return to your capital, I shall now ascend to my own abode.’

“The mighty and illustrious Brahma then ascended to heaven and the royal Sage Bhagiratha, having performed the obsequies of the sons of King Sagara, with the water of the sacred Ganges, returned to his capital.

“Enjoying every felicity, King Bhagiratha began to govern once more and his people rejoiced that he had again assumed rulership. All were freed from suffering and anxiety and they increased in wealth and prosperity.

“O Rama, I have narrated the story of the descent of Shri Ganga fully to you. May prosperity attend you I Dusk has fallen and the hour of the evening prayer has come. This story gives wealth, prosperity, fame, longevity, sons, and residence in heaven to the reader. He who causes it to be heard by others whether he be a brahmin or a kshatriya, brings joy to his ancestors and the gods.

“O Ramacandra, he who with fixed attention listens to this story, shall obtain all he desires, his sins will be remitted and he will obtain long life and renown.”