Having received the weapons and instructions for their use, Shri Rama addressed the sage in charming accents as they proceeded onward.

He said: “O Blessed One, by your grace, I have received weapons which even the devas and asuras cannot easily obtain. Be pleased to tell me further, how I may withdraw these weapons when they are discharged?”

Then the supremely patient and holy sage taught Shri Ramacandra the method of withdrawing the mantra-propelled weapons and gave him more by the name of Satyavana, Satyakirti, Dhrishta, Raphasa, Pratiharatara, Parangmukha, Avangmukha, Lakshya, Alakshya, Drirnabha and Sunabhuka, Dasharsha, Shutavaktra, Dashashirsha, Shatodara, Dharmanabha and Mahanabha, Dundanabha and Svanabhuka, Jyotisha and Shakuna and the two weapons Nirashya and Vimala, also the Yogandhara and Vinidra, Ditya and Pramanthana, Shuchivahu, Mahavanu, Nishkali, Viruca, Sarchimali Dhriti and Mali, Vrittiman and Rucira, Pitryia and Soamanasvidhuta and Makara, Karavira with Rati, Dhana and Dhanya.

The holy sage said, “O Rama, receive also Kamarupa, Kamaruci, Moha and Avarana, also Jrim Bhala, Sarpanatha with Sandhana and Varuna. Receive from me, O Rama, the Krishashva which assumes any form—O Prince, mayest you be triumphant, you are worthy to possess these weapons”. Shri Rama answered “May it be so, my Lord”.

The holy rishi then placed the divine weapons before Rama, some of which shone like fire, others with the colour of smoke and yet others which resembled the sun and moon. With joined palms the deities presiding over them addressed Shri Rama with submission, saying: “O Prince, we are at your service, what would’st you have us accomplish?” Shri Rama answered: “When called to mind in the time of need, grant me aid, now depart, all of you.”

Offering obeisance to Shri Ramacandra, they replied: “Be it so, my Lord,” and returned to their abode.

Shri Rama then questioned the great rishi, saying: “O Spiritual Sovereign, what is this that resembles a dark cloud near the mountain? It would seem to be a grove of trees, pleasing to the sight, filled with deer. I hear birds singing sweetly, have we then passed the dangerous forest which was a cause of fear? O Lord, let us rest here at peace; tell me, whose hermitage is this? O Great Muni, are we now in thine own hermitage, where the wicked demons, the slayers of brahmins obstruct your sacrifice? O Blessed One, be pleased to show me the place of your sacrifice. O Wise One, I will slay the meddlesome demons who hinder your devotions. Be gracious enough to enlighten me in the matter, O Sage.”