Shri Vishvamitra heard the appeal of the fallen sovereign and in sweet accents spoke words of comfort, saying: “O King, you are welcome, I know you to be wholly virtuous, I will be your refuge, fear not. I shall invite hither the learned and pious brahmans who will assist you in the performance of your sacrifice. This you shalt accomplish and obtain heaven in the form imposed on you by your Guru. O King, having taken refuge in me, consider your purpose already accomplished.”

Having uttered these words, Shri Vishvamitra commanded his sons to prepare all things for the sacrifice. Summoning his disciples, he said to them: “Bring hither the pious and learned brahmins and the sons of Shri Vasishtha also. May they come with their disciples, their friends, the learned and the priests. If any disregard my word, let it be reported to me.

In obedience to the sage, the disciples set out to every quarter, summoning the sages and learned men from many lands. Returning, they approached Vishvamitra, and said: “O Lord, at your command the holy sages are coming hither, some are already come, Mahodeva excepted; but the sons of holy Vasishtha, transported with rage uttered harsh words of which we will tell you.” They said: “How shall divine sages partake of that sacrifice undertaken by a chandala, at which a kshatriya officiates? And how shall those brahmins, constrained by Vishvamitra, partaking of the food offered by a chandala, enter heaven?”

O Great Sage, these are the words of the sons of Shri Vasishtha.

Vishvamitra, his eyes red with anger, answered: “Why should the sons of Shri Vasishtha disregard me, who am engaged in severe ascetic practices and without guilt? By my power, these evil-minded men shall this day be consumed to ashes and enter the abode of death. By my curse they shall become of those who subsist on the dead for a hundred incarnations. They shall eat the flesh of dogs and be called ‘Musthika’. Despised by all, they shall wander about among men and may the wicked Mahodeva also, having imputed blame to me, be born as a fowler, for a long time becoming the pitiless destroyer of other’s lives and by my wrath may he sink to a miserable and abject state.”

Sitting amid the sages, the Sage Vishvamitra having pronounced this curse, became silent.