Queen Kaushalya, lying trembling on the ground like one dead or possessed by an evil spirit, now said to the charioteer: “O Sumantra, take me to the place where Rama, Lakshmana and Janaki dwell! Life without them, even for a moment, is vain. Speedily return there in your chariot, either I must follow them or enter the region of death.”

Shri Sumantra, weeping and distressed, respectfully sought to console the Queen, saying: “O Lady, abandon disquiet, infatuation and anxiety born of grief! Shri Rama will live happily in the forest! Prince Lakshmana, self-subdued, serving Rama and living in accordance with virtue will fashion for himself an auspicious future. In the solitary forest, Shri Sita, her mind wholly centered on Rama in devotion, will live without fear, as in her own home. I see no lack of courage in Princess Sita, it would appear that she was born to reside in a strange land. As in former days, she enjoyed the parks and gardens, so does she now enjoy the uninhabited forest. Sita, whose countenance resembles the full moon, her mind absorbed in Rama, depending on him, sports in the forest; with her heart and mind centred on him, she would hold this great capital no better than a wilderness without Rama. Walking in the forest, seeing the. villages, rivers, towns and various kinds of trees, she enquires of Rama concerning their history and origin. To her, the forest is a pleasure garden in the neighbourhood of Ayodhya. This I remember of Sita, but what she said of Kaikeyi now slips my mind.”

Sumantra, carefully withholding the reference to Kaikeyi which had escaped from him through inadvertence and in order to propitiate Queen Kaushalya, addressed her further, saying: “The lustre of the face of Janaki is not marred by the fatigue' of the journey or the winds or through fear of dangerous beasts or through the heat of the sun. The countenance of the Princess, resembling the full moon is not impaired by residence in the forest. Her feet, no longer painted with vermilion, appear as fresh as lotuses.

The princess ever exceedingly devoted to Rama, has not put off her ornaments, but with her tinkling anklets trips happily along, causing the very swans to envy her. Depending on the power of Shri Rama, she suffers no fear at the sight of a lion or tiger in the forest. O Lady, there is no cause for grief for these three or for the king or thyself. The self-imposed exile of Shri Rama, in obedience to his father’s command, will remain a subject for veneration to the whole world, as long as the sun and moon abide. Having banished sorrow, Shri Rama pursuing the path trodden by the sages, living on fruits and berries, fulfils the behest of his sire.”

Though consoled by the charioteer, Queen Kaushalya, torn with grief, in the separation from her son, cried out: “O My Darling, O My Son, O Rama,” and continued to weep.