Indra thus addressed Rambha saying: “O Rambha, it is for you to accomplish this great work and stimulate the passions of the great Sage Vishvamitra, so that his spiritual practices may be rendered void.”

O Rama, Rambha, filled with apprehension on hearing the words of Indra, said in humility: “O Indra, the Rishi Vishvamitra is easily moved to wrath, he will certainly curse me if I approach him. I fear to enter his presence, do not therefore ask me to undertake this task.”

To Rambha, trembling with fear, standing with joined palms, in token of submission, Indra made answer: “O Rambha, fear not, accomplish my desire, may success attend you!

In the spring season, assuming the form of a cuckoo calling sweetly, accompanied by the god of love, I will take my place on a blossoming tree not far from you. O Rambha, attired in beautiful and charming apparel do you divert the mind of the muni from his spiritual practices.”

At the instance of Indra, that lovely nymph clad in enchanting raiment, faintly smiling, went forth to allure the heart of Shri Vishvamitra.

At that moment, the liquid notes of the cuckoo began to delight the rishi and he then beheld the nymph Rambha. Stirred by the cuckoo’s note and the ravishing sound of the beautiful Rambha’s song, Shri Vishvamitra, recollecting his former fall, was filled with misgiving and recognizing the design of the god Indra, transported with rage, cursed Rambha, saying:—

“O Rambha, O Unfortunate One, you have come hither to lure me from my penance, I, who have conquered lust and anger. Mayest you become petrified and take the form of a rock for ten thousand years. A brahmin perfected in the power of Yoga shall one day deliver you from this curse.”

Having pronounced this curse on Rambha, the rishi became a prey to remorse, for, giving way to wrath he lost the fruit of all his yogic practices.

Rambha having been instantly turned to stone, Indra and Kama, perceiving the sage filled with wrath, fled in terror.

Shri Vishvamitra having lost the merit of his penances could obtain no peace; his passions remaining unsubdued, he resolved to speak no word to any and never give way to anger; he said: “For a thousand years, I will not breathe. Reducing my body to the last extremity, mastering my senses, I will obtain brahmanhood by the power of my penance. Measureless years, shall I remain standing, neither breathing nor eating, even should my limbs become atrophied.”

O Rama, Vishvamitra resolved to perform this mortification for the space of a thousand years.