Having spoken thus, Shri Vasishtha continued, uttering words of wisdom. “O Rama, when a man is born, he must regard as his teachers, his father, his mother and his spiritual preceptor.

“O Chief of Men, the parents bestow on man the physical frame, but the spiritual preceptor confers wisdom on him, and hence he is called Guru.

“I am the preceptor of your father and of you, mark my counsel and do not over-ride the way of the good. O My Son, here are your relatives, the learned brahmins and the people of the capital, as also the warriors and merchants. Fulfil your duty to them and do not exceed the limits of moral obligation.

“Here is your pious and aged mother, whom you should not disobey. That man is called virtuous who renders obedience to his mother.

“O Prince, you shalt not have swerved from the path of righteous action by acceding to Bharata’s request that you should occupy the throne.”

Thus, having addressed Rama with mildness, the holy Guru Vasishtha resumed his seat.

The mighty Rama then made answer, saying: “The good that parents do to their son cannot easily be recompensed. In childhood, they present him with beautiful attire and delectable dishes, they put him to rest and tenderly rub his body with oil of sesamum seed and manifest affection in gentle counsels; further they strive single-mindedly for his ultimate good.

“The commands of my sire, the author of my being, shall not be set aside.”

The magnanimous Bharata hearing these words of Ramacandra, suffered great distress, and spoke to Sumantra, saying: “O Charioteer, prepare a seat of kusha grass on this trestle seat, I will place myself before Shri Rama till he be pleased to grant my request. Like a brahmin, who is destitute, I will lie at the door of this hut, fasting and covering my face, till Shri Rama consents to return to the capital.”

Sumantra looking towards Shri Rama, spread the kusha grass, and Prince Bharata, full of grief, seated himself there, before his brother.

Perceiving this, Shri Rama, chief of the royal sages, said to him: “O Beloved Bharata, what wrong have I done that you should sit thus before me? A brahmin may adopt this measure towards his aggressor, but it is not meet that a crowned head should do so. O Lion among Men, rise, abandon this cruel vow and return speedily to the capital.”

Bharata, afflicted, yet resolute, remaining firm, said to the people of the capital and of the country who surrounded him: “Why do you not also make entreaty to Shri Rama?”

Then they answered saying: “We are unable to press Kakustha further, since he is resolved to follow his father’s command.”

Rama hearing their words said to Bharata: “O Prince, consider the words of your companions versed in righteousness and weigh the matter carefully. Having reflected on their words with attention, arise, O Raghava, and undergo that which shall purify you for having enacted that which does not become a warrior. Do you drink water and touch me also.”

Bharata rising, said: “Hear, O Brahmins, Countrymen and Warriors! I do not desire the kingdom of my father, I did not urge my mother to demand it. I knew naught of the exile of Shri Rama. If it be required that someone shall dwell in the forest in obedience to my father’s command, then will I reside there for fourteen years in his stead.”

Shri Rama, astonished at his brother’s resolution, addressed the people present, saying: “Friends, whatever was bought, pledged or sold by the king in his lifetime, can by no means be cancelled by me or Bharata. Neither can I accept contumely and permit Bharata to go as my representative to the forest. What Kaikeyi demanded was rightfully granted by the king.

“I know Bharata to be disinterested and a true disciple of his Guru, and that excellent one is a lover of truth. I herewith declare that on my return from the forest, I shall accept the kingdom and with my virtuous brother govern the country with honour.

“O Bharata, I have discharged the boon granted to Kaikeyi by the king and vindicated his honour. Do you liberate the king from the charge of falsehood and redeem the second boon.”