The great souled Bharata affectionately requested the pious Shatrughna to accompany him, on the journey to his maternal grandfather.

Enjoying abundant hospitality and held by their uncle Ashvapati in all affection, the two brothers dwelt there happily. Satisfied with the love and entertainment bestowed on them, they daily remembered their royal sire, the aged monarch, and the king also thought of his sons, now in a distant country.

The four sons of the aged king were as dear to him as his own four arms issuing from his body, yet Rama resembling Brahma, endowed with every good attribute, was dearest to his sire. Shri Rama, the eternal Purusha, the Lord Vishnu himself, descended on earth on the entreaty of the gods, to slay Ravana, the enemy of the whole world.

The charming Queen Kaushalya, glowing with maternal love for her son Ramacandra, resembled Aditi at the birth of Indra.

Unequalled in beauty, brave and chivalrous, never speaking ill of others, Rama inherited the virtues of his illustrious father; of a cheerful disposition, speaking soft words to all, never returning a harsh answer when treated with contumely; when injured, pardoning the' offender and remembering the offence no more; showing gratitude for the least of favours and devoting his leisure from affairs of state to seeking the friendship of those eminent in wisdom, learning, age and conduct. Wise and generous, he was foremost in addressing others, speaking with affection; supremely courageous yet not rendered vainglorious by his own powers; never uttering falsehood, honouring the learned and the aged, showing regard for his people who were devoted to him; having overcome wrath; surpassingly compassionate, venerating the brahmins; showing extreme pity for the poor; well-versed in public and individual responsibilities, fulfilling his domestic duties, not only to add lustre to the dynasty but also to attain an exalted state in the other world. Wise in the discharge of his obligations; as a Scion of the House of Ikshvaku, proving himself tender and loving to those who sought his protection; restraining the evil-doer; ever seeking the weal of his subjects; eschewing frivolous pursuits and shallow talk; neither hearing nor speaking aught against dharma; in debate equal in eloquence to Brihaspati; free from infirmities; youthful, handsome, having knowledge of time and space and being able to divine the contents of a man’s heart at a single glance; verily a great sage and for his marvellous qualities as dear to the people as life itself. Profoundly learned in the science and the philosophy of the Veda, which he had studied with his spiritual preceptor, he even excelled his father in the art of warfare. The repository of all auspiciousness, virtuous, cheerful, truthful and guileless; having received full instruction from the learned brahmins in sacred and secular policy, knowing the significance of virtue, material prosperity and enjoyment; of prodigious memory, conversant with worldly wisdom, possessing a pleasing disposition, gentle, able to conceal his thoughts; recognizing when to refuse and when to accept material gifts; winning many friends, firm in his devotion to his Guru and to God, countenancing no sin; never uttering a bitter word or one which would agitate the hearts of others; energetic, deploring his own faults whilst excusing those of others; a great advocate, grateful, lending support to those he held in affection; in all circumstances true to his word; capable of protecting the interests of his family and friends; knowing how to meet out retribution to the wicked. Acquiring wealth by just means, and appreciating how to distribute it with discrimination. Proficient in the Veda, following the literary and dramatic arts with enthusiasm, endowed with the gift of oratory in Sanskrita and his own native tongue; depending on right alone for felicity and prosperity; prudent, accomplished in sport, music and painting; an incomparable rider whether mounted on horse or elephant; skilled in archery, renowned in the field, forestalling the enemy in attack and knowing how to destroy his defences; fired with righteous wrath when engaging in combat, so that neither god nor titan could withstand him; speaking nought against any; free from pride and envy; ever submissive, yet overruled in his resolve by none; preeminent among his people; renowned in the three worlds; in forbearance resembling the earth, in wisdom equal to Brihaspati, in courage like unto Indra.

Shining resplendent like the full moon in the love of his people and his sire, worshipped for his excellent qualities, his matchless valour and his integrity, the earth desired to make him her lord.

Seeing his illustrious son manifesting these qualities, King Dasaratha began to reflect in this wise: “I have become old and have ruled a full measure of years. I desire to see Rama crowned while I yet live 1”

This inclination grew in the mind of the king, and he waited eagerly for the time when he might resign his throne in favour of Rama. He reflected: “Rama, resembling a cloud, raining compassion on all; beloved far beyond myself; in valour equal to Yama and Indra, in understanding like Brihaspati, in endurance like unto a mountain, exceeding myself in excellent attributes; on him do I desire to confer the dominion of the earth; this will be my heaven.”

Then that great sovereign summoning his ministers communicated to them his resolve to proclaim Rama, endowed with those powers, rare even in a king, and a mine of surpassing virtues, as heir-apparent.

At that time, inauspicious portents appeared on the earth, and in the heavens, and the king, conscious that he had grown old, reflected that by bestowing the throne on Rama, he would gratify his comely son, and also assuage his own sorrow and benefit his people. Filled with affection for his subjects, and for their good, he desired to increase their felicity by installing Rama as heir-apparent, when the hour was auspicious.

Summoning the subject princes and the inhabitants of other cities and lands with due respect, the aged monarch entertained them in his palaces, bestowing on them gifts of various kinds, but the sovereign of Kaikeya and the king of Mithila were not informed of the occasion since they would hear of it thereafter. Seated in the assembly, the king resembled Prajapati in the midst of his subjects.

The kings of the earth coming together in council, King Dasaratha occupying the throne and they taking the places prepared for them, reverently faced the royal dais, observing the traditions of the court. Surrounded by his feudal lords and the elders, the king appeared like Indra sitting among the gods.