As the mighty army traversed the forest, the leaders of the herds of wild elephants with their companions, ran away in alarm. Bears, leopards and other fierce beasts could be seen fleeing on the hilltops and by the banks of the river.

Supremely gratified, Prince Bharata proceeded in the midst of his soldiers who shouted as they marched. The army of the illustrious Bharata, resembled an ocean, whose waves spread over the earth or like the clouds covering the sky during the rainy season. The ground for miles was covered with elephants and horses, so that no trace of it could be seen.

Having marched a considerable distance, Shri Bharata, perceiving his animals to be fatigued, addressed the holy priest, Shri Vasishtha, saying: “This country appears to be as beautiful as described to me, I deem that we have reached that place spoken of by the Sage Bharadvaja. This mountain is Cittrakuta, and this is the Mandakini river, and this is the forest which, from a distance, resembled a blue cloud. These are the glorious peaks of Cittrakuta, which are being trodden by my great elephants! See, O Holy Guru, as the dark douds pour down water in the rainy season, so do the elephants, whose trunks are scarred by the waving branches of the trees, scatter flowers on the hills.

“O Shatrughna, behold the lovely Cittrakuta mountain sought after by the gods; everywhere herds of deer wander about enhancing its beauty, like crocodiles swimming gracefully in the sea. As clouds driven by the wind in winter adorn the sky, so do these deer running before the army, render the forest delightful.

“Our soldiers decorating their heads with flowers, resemble the people of the south who crown themselves with blossoms. See, O Shatrughna, the forest that appeared terrifying and seemed to breathe by being filled with men, resembles Ayodhya itself!

“The dust rising from the hoofs of the bullocks covers the sky and settles there, till the wind quickly dispels it, as if those things obstructing my vision of Shri Rama were being removed from my eyes. O Shatrughna, behold these horses yoked to the chariots with their charioteers, swiftly passing through the forest! And see those beautiful peacocks with long feathers, running in fear towards their habitation on the mountain. O Sinless Brother, this place appears enchanting to me and a fit abode for ascetics.

“How lovely are the spotted deer wandering about with their hinds; they appear as if studded with flowers. Let my leaders go forward and seek out the place where Shri Rama and Lakshmana dwell.”

Hearing the words of Shri Bharata, the warriors bearing weapons in their hands, entered the forest and there perceived a spot where smoke was ascending. On beholding this, they returned to Prince Bharata and communicated to him their belief, that the two royal brothers dwelt where the smoke arose. They said: “If it be not Shri Rama and Lakshmana yonder, then surely it is some devotee who can inform us concerning the dwelling place of Raghava!”

Hearing this pleasing report, Shri Bharata addressed the leaders of the army saying: “Do you remain here, do not proceed further, I, with the holy Guru Vasishtha and Sumantra will go forward to that place.”

Thus commanded die warriors halted and Shri Bharata looked towards the spot where the smoke was visible. Observing the smoke, the warriors, waiting at that place, rejoiced, believing the time for the meeting with Shri Rama was at hand.