As the sun rose in a cloudless sky, having passed the night under a banyan tree, they set out from thence and proceeded to where the Ganga and the Yamuna meet, flowing through the vast forest. The two illustrious brothers journeying onwards beheld beautiful vistas in the forest, hitherto unseen by them, and they, sometimes reclining at ease, delighted in the blossoming trees. The day being nearly over, Shri Rama said to the son of Sumitra: “O Lakshmana, look towards Prayaga, smoke is rising like the fire-god’s banner; undoubtedly, it is a sign that the hermitage of holy Bharadvaja is near. We have assuredly reached the junction of the Ganga and Yamuna, the sound of these mighty rivers clashing together is clearly heard. Wood-cutters have hewn the logs from mighty trees and many are cut down in the hermitage of the holy sage.” Conversing thus, as the sun was setting, the two great archers reached the confluence of the Ganga and Yamuna, and the hermitage of Bharadvaja. Desiring to look upon the holy sage, they halted respectfully at some little distance from the place. Then Rama slowly and reverently entered the hermitage, beholding there the omniscient Sage Bharadvaja of mighty vows, the conqueror of time by sacred discipline. Surrounded by his disciples, offering oblations into the holy fire, they beheld the rishi, and Rama with Sita and Lakshmana paid obeisance to him. Rama said: " O Blessed and Mighty Sage, we are Rama and Lakshmana, the sons of King Dasaratha, and this, my wife, is the daughter of Videha’s King, this fortunate one is following me to the lonely Tapovana. My royal sire has sent me into exile and the son of Sumitra, my younger brother, ever dear to me, taking the brahmacarya vow, has followed me. O Blessed Lord, fulfilling the behests of our father, we shall enter the sacred forest and, practising dharma, live on roots and berries.”

The virtuous sage, Bharadvaja, hearing the words of Prince Rama, offering them madhuparka together with the arghya, and water wherewith to wash their feet, thereafter gave them various roots and fruits. Then the holy sage prepared a resting place for them. The Maharishi Bharadvaja, seated amidst the deer and birds, thus honoured Rama, enquiring as to his welfare. Rama receiving the worship of the great rishi, reflected on the words spoken to him: “O Prince, I behold you after a long time, I have heard that you wast exiled without cause. Remain here at ease and in peace, at this sacred and pleasant place where the two great rivers meet.”

Shri Rama, ever devoted to the good of all, answered: “O Lord, your hermitage is close to the abodes of men and many will come hither to gaze on Sita and myself. I therefore do not deem it wise to linger here. O Blessed One, do you inform me of a lonely place, where Sita, the daughter of Janaka, may live in happiness.”

In gentle accents Shri Bharadvaja replied: “O Child, ten miles from here, there is a mountain, purified by the presence of many sages who dwell there, beautiful and pleasing to the sight, there do you abide. Monkeys, bears and chimpanzees wander there freely. That mountain is Cittrakuta, delightful as Gandhamadana. Those beholding the peaks of Cittrakuta, obtain spiritual merit, their minds admit no sin and, living there, they win divine rewards. Many sages, performing austerities there for thousands of years, have entered heaven in their embodied state. O Rama, this lovely place is a fit residence for you, I deem, if you will not remain here with me until the period of thine exile be past.” Thus Bharadvaja honoured Rama with Sita and Lakshmana offering them every mark of hospitality due to their royal state. So in the hermitage of the great sage at Prayaga, Rama spent the night in converse on ancient times. Relieved of weariness, Shri Rama with Lakshmana and Sita passed the night pleasantly in the sacred hermitage. When morning dawned, Shri Ramacandra, approaching the great sage made resplendent by virtue of austere practices, thus addressed him: “O You devoted to truth, we have passed the night at ease in your hermitage now grant us leave to depart to the place appointed by you.”

Shri Bharadvaja then made answer. “O Rama, set out for the mountain Cittrakuta abounding in honey, roots and fruit, worthy to be your dwelling, covered with trees and the abode of heavenly beings; there, peacocks cry and mighty tuskers roam. Go then to that sacred place, which is pleasant and filled with fruit and flowers, and where elephants and deer wander through the woods. There, lingering with Sita by the springs and waterfalls, the mountain slopes and peaceful caves, your mind will find delight. O Rama, do you depart to dwell on that high and lovely mountain thronged with elephants and various beasts, where the tittibha1 and the kokila sing.”