The Omniscient Lord, Shri Narayana, listened to the praise offered by the gods and honouring them, uttered words of pleasing import to them.

He said: “O Devas, by what means may the King of the Asuras be slain, that thorn in the side of holy men?”

The gods with one accord answered the imperishable Lord, crying: “Do You become incarnate in the form of man and slay him in open fight. O Conqueror of Your foes, Ravana has long practised austerities, by means of which he has won the favour of the world-revered Brahma. That deity has granted him a boon, by which he is rendered invulnerable to all but man. Considering man of no account, he does not fear him. The boon bestowed on him by Shri Brahma has made him arrogant and he is bringing destruction to the three worlds and carrying off women by violence. Therefore, O Lord, man alone can bring about his death.”

Hearing the words of the gods, Shri Vishnu resolved to choose King Dasaratha as his sire.

At that time, the illustrious King Dasaratha, the slayer of his foes, began to observe the sacrifice in order to obtain an heir. Shri Vishnu, having formed his resolution to appear in human form and concluded his deUberations with Shri Brahma, vanished.

Forthwith there issued from King Dasaratha’s sacrificial fire to the sound resembling the beating of a drum, a great Being of limitless splendour, of glowing countenance, clad in red and hairy as a lion. Bearing auspicious marks and adorned with beautiful ornaments, his height was equal to the peak of a mountain. Striding boldly like a lion, his form shone as fire. In both hands he carried, as would a beloved spouse, a vessel of gold, with a silver cover, filled with payasa.

This great Being addressed the king saying: “O King, I come from Prajapati. The king bowing down with joined palms, answered: “You are welcome, O Lord, what orders hast you for me?”

Then the Being replied: “Receive the fruit of your sacrifice! O Chief of Men, accept this dish of payasa prepared by the gods, it will bring you sons and increase your power. Let it be eaten by your consorts, they will then present you with the heirs for whose sake you have performed the sacrifice.”

The king received the food contained in the golden vessel prepared by the gods and reverently raised it to his forehead. Having received the divine repast, he rejoiced as a penniless man on obtaining wealth.

Forthwith that wonderful and resplendent being vanished, having offered the consecrated food to the king.

The tidings of this great event caused the consorts of King Dasaratha extreme delight and they appeared as radiant as the beams of the moon irradiating the autumnal sky.

Entering the private apartments, the king addressed Queen Kaushalya, saying: “Receive this food and partake of it that you mayest have a son.”

Thereafter, the monarch gave half of the dish to Queen Kaushalya and one-third to Queen Sumitra. Then he gave the eighth of the payasa to Queen Kaikeyi and, after reflection, the remainder to Queen Sumitra. In this way, the King divided the dish of payasa among his three queens.

On partaking of the food, the beautiful queens were overjoyed and considered themselves most fortunate.

Having consumed the payasa presented to them by the king, the queens soon became pregnant, their wombs glowing like the fire in the sun.

The illustrious sovereign perceiving that the wombs of his consorts were quickened and that his great desire was about to be fulfilled, was filled with supreme joy, as is Shri Vishnu when worshipped by the gods and perfect beings in the celestial region.