The night being past, the great Sage Vishvamitra took leave of King Dasaratha and King Janaka and, blessing the princes and their sire, departed for the Himalayas to meditate there. The holy rishi being gone, King Dasaratha begged the permission of the Lord of Mithila to return to his capital. Bidding farewell to the pious king, Janaka escorted him for some distance on his way.

To the King of Ayodhya, on behalf of his daughter, King Janaka gave a hundred thousand cows, woollen cloths, countless silken robes and richly decorated elephants, horses and chariots. He also bestowed on him male and female attendants, numberless golden coins with quantities of pearls and coral. All these and many other gifts King Janaka gave with a joyful mind, and having taken leave of King Dasaratha, returned to Mithila, whereupon King Dasaratha with his illustrious sons, preceded by the sages, started on the homeward journey, accompanied by his army.

As the sages, with Shri Ramacandra, advanced in company with the king, the screeching of strange and terrible birds was heard, while frightened deer fled across their path.

Perceiving these inauspicious signs, the king addressed Shri Vasishtha, saying: “O Holy Guru, why do the birds cry thus ominously, and the deer traverse our path? What do these omens portend? My mind is filled with anxiety, O Divine Lord.”

The Maharishi Vasishtha, in gentle tones, replied: “O King, the fearful crying of the birds betokens some great danger, but the crossing of the deer from left to right indicates a speedy end to your fears.”

While they were yet speaking, the earth began to quake and and giant trees fell down, darkness covered the earth and clouds of dust veiled the sun, nor could the cardinal points be discerned. In the great dust storm that followed, the army was overwhelmed with terror and all became paralysed, save Shri Vasishtha, King Dasaratha and the princes alone.

When the dust was allayed and the army somewhat recovered, Shri Vasishtha beheld the son of Yamadagni of dreadful aspect. With matted hair, Parasurama, the humbler of the pride of kings and emperors, drew near.

The appearance of the muni resembling the splendour of Mount Kailasha or the fires of dissolution at the end of the world-period was hardly to be borne by human eyes. With his battle axe on his shoulder, bearing a mighty bow, brilliant as lightning, he appeared like Shiva about to strike down Tripura.

Beholding Parasurama resembling a blazing fire, the sages reflected among themselves and said: “His father being slain, has Parasurama come again to destroy the warrior caste?” Was not his anger appeased when he formerly destroyed the whole warrior caste? Has he come again to take his revenge on us?”

Reflecting thus, they approached Parasurama with traditional offerings, saying: “O Rama, accept this arghya.”

Shri Parasurama accepting the offering, then addressed Shri Rama.