Having issued commands to those eight titans, renowned for their prowess, Ravana, whose perception was clouded, considered that he had prepared himself for every eventuality.

Brooding on Vaidehi, sorely pierced by the shafts of the God of Love, he hastened to his sumptuous apartments, inflamed with desire for her presence. Entering there, Ravana, the King of the Titans, observed Sita overcome with grief, surrounded by titan women, like a ship foundering in the sea at the mercy of a storm or a gazelle separated from the herd beset by hounds.

Then Ravana approaching that princess, whose head was bowed and who was disconsolate, compelled her to view that mansion resembling the abode of the Gods, containing many storeys and spacious apartments, inhabited by innumerable women and enriched by countless gems, whilst flocks of birds filled it with their carolling. Graceful pillars of gold, ivory, crystal and silver, encrusted with emeralds and diamonds could be seen and celestial gongs resounded there.

Ravana, in company with Sita, ascended the magnificent golden stairway, ornamented with burnished gold. Those lofty buildings possessed excellent windows of gold and ivory covered with golden trellises, and their marble floors were inlaid with precious stones that shed their lustre everywhere. Then Dashagriva showed Maithili the fountains and pools covered with lotuses and every kind of flower; all this did he bring to the notice of Sita who was overcome with grief; and after directing Vaidehi’s attention to the splendours of the palace, that perverse wretch, with the intention of seducing her, said:

“O Sita, apart from the aged and the children, ten thousand titans, rangers of the night, all of whom are famed for their exploits, acknowledge me as their lord, and each among them has placed a thousand loyal servants at my disposal. This entire state, as also my life, is thine, O Large-eyed Lady. You are dearer to me than life itself! O Sita, become the queen of those numerous excellent women who are my wives. O Beloved, be my consort, it is to thine advantage. What boots it to consider aught else, do you give my proposal your consideration; it behoves you to look favourably on me, who am burning with desire.

“Surrounded by the ocean, this city of Lanka, extending for a hundred yojanas, can never be taken by storm, even by the Gods themselves with Indra at their head. Among the Celestials, Yakshas, Gandharvas and Nagas, I can see none in all the worlds equal to me in prowess. Deprived of his kingdom, without possessions, dedicated to ascetic practices, travelling on foot, what canst you hope from Rama, a mere man without resources?

“O Sita, I am a consort worthy of you, do you accept me; youth soon passes, O Darling; enjoy these delights with me. O Lady of charming mien, do not think of seeing Raghava again. How could he come hither even in thought? Who can fetter the impetuous wind in the sky or seize the pure flame of a brazier? None in the Three Worlds may snatch you from mine arms. Do you rule over this vast empire of Lanka and all beings, animate and inanimate; even I and the Gods shall be your servants. Laving thyself in the crystal waters, be happy and live in delight. Your former evil karma has been expiated by the time passed by you in the forest. It is here that you will be able to pluck the fruit of your good deeds. In my company, O Maithili, enjoy these garlands with their divine fragrance and these magnificent ornaments. With me do you disport thyself in the aerial chariot Puskpaka, bright as the sun, that was once Vaishravana’s, which I won by my prowess in combat, that vast and beautiful car, swift as thought.

“Your countenance, flawless and lovely to look upon, pure as a lotus, is wan on account of sorrow and has lost its radiance, O Lady of lovely limbs and gracious features.”

Whilst he was speaking, the beautiful Sita covered her face that sparkled like the moon with the hem of her robe and allowed her tears to flow.

Thereat the sinful Ravana, that Ranger of the Night, addressed Sita who was sunk in thought and forlorn, her cheeks pale on account of grief, saying:—

“O Vaidehi, do not fear to contravene dharma; the ceremony that shall consecrate our union is sanctioned by the Veda! I press your tender feet with my heads; grant my prayer speedily! I am your slave and ever obedient to you! May these words, inspired by the torments of love, not prove fruitless; never before has Ravana bowed his head before a woman.”

Having spoken thus to Maithili, the daughter of Janaka, Dashagriva under the sway of destiny, thought: “She is mine I”.