O Rama, the illustrious King Ambarisha, accompanied by Shunashepha, having in the afternoon reached Pushkara, rested there. While the king rested, Shunashepha, going to a certain spot, beheld Shri Vishvamitra, his maternal uncle, engaged with other sages in the performance of spiritual practices and he, sorrowful, thirsty and fatigued, fell at the feet of the sage, and said: “O Lord, for me there is neither father, mother, relative nor caste. O Peaceful Sage, O Sovereign among ascetics, I take refuge in you; in the name of dharma, deliver me. You can’st protect the whole world, how much more one so insignificant as myself. Do you assist the king in the completion of his sacrifice that it may be accomplished without hindrance, and may I live and by means of my spiritual practices obtain heaven. You are my master who am masterless. Protect me, wretched as I am, as a father protects his child.”

Shri Vishvamitra, hearing the piteous words of Shunashepha addressed his own sons, saying: “O My Sons, that world for which fathers beget their children is at hand, this child is the son of the Sage Richika and has taken refuge in me, let us protect his life. You are all virtuous and charitable, let one of you take the place of the sacrificial victim at the king’s sacrifice, and thus satisfy the God Agni. In this way, we can rescue Shunashepha. Assist me in the completion of the king’s sacrifice, propitiate the gods, and enable me to be true to my word.”

Hearing these words, Madhusyanda and the other sons sullenly replied to Vishvamitra, saying: “O King of Kings, would’st you abandon thine own sons and protect another’s? Such an action resembles the relinquishing of a tasty dish to partake of the flesh of a dog.”

Hearing this reply, Shri Vishvamitra grew angry and, his eyes inflamed with wrath, he said: “Your speech is arrogant and contrary to dharma, it is a violation of filial affection. I regard you all as insubordinate, therefore, I now curse you. Like the sons of Shri Vasishtha, may you fall from your high caste and, eating the flesh of dogs, wander about in the world during the period of a thousand years!”

Having thus cursed his sons, the muni, offering Shunashepha his protection, thus instructed him: “O Son of a Sage, at King Ambarisha’s sacrifice, allow thyself to be bound, adorned with the red garland, besmeared with sandalwood paste and tied to the sacrificial post. I will impart to you two mantrams, which when repeated, will deliver you.”

The holy sage then carefully instructed him in the sacred formulas. Thereafter, Shunashepha approached the king and said: “O Illustrious Monarch, now enter upon the initiation without delay and accomplish the performance of your sacrifice.”

The king, filled with joy, went without delay to the sacrificial pavilion. With the consent of the officiating priest, the king now dressed Shunashepha in red attire and tied him to the post as the consecrated victim. Being bound, Shunashepha began to praise Upendra by reciting the mantrams he had been given by Vishvamitra.

Indra, pleased with the worship of Shunashepha, bestowed the blessing of long life on him.

O Rama, then did the king complete his sacrifice and obtain the desired fruit from Indra.

Thereafter, the righteous Vishvamitra renewed his yogic penance in Pushkara and performed it there for a thousand years.