After this the great Rishi Vishvamitra, leaving the northern quarter, went eastward and engaged in a most severe course of austerities. Observing silence for a thousand years, he performed incomparable ascetic practices, hardly able to be accomplished.

After a thousand years, his form reduced to the semblance of wood, the royal sage, under the greatest provocation, was not incited to anger. O Rama, when Vishvamitra was persuaded that he had conquered anger, his vow of a thousand years’ mortification being terminated, he sat down to eat.

At that time, Indra appeared in the guise of a brahmin and requested the food set before the muni, upon which Vishvamitra, believing him to be a sage, gave him the whole which he had prepared for himself and still observing the vow of silence, uttered no word.

' The chief of the sages, suspending his breath for a further thousand years, continued his penance, then there issued from his head a smoke which terrified the beings of the three worlds. By the power of his mortification, the devas, gandharvas, and other beings were deprived of their glory and lost consciousness.

In distress, they addressed Shri Brahma saying: “O Lord, by every means in our power, we have sought to distract the great sage from his penances and provoke him to anger, but he has persisted in his practices and is free from desire and aversion. If you dost not grant him brahmanhood, verily the three worlds will be destroyed. None can find rest anywhere, the seas are drying up and the mountains are riven by the power of his austerities; the sun is deprived of its splendour, the earth is agitated and the wind stirs not. O Lord, we cannot move him from his resolve. On account of this peril, men like atheists have given up the performance of charitable deeds. Nowhere is peace to be found. O Divine Being, lest the mighty Vishvamitra, resplendent as fire, determine to destroy the universe, deign to grant him his desire. As Time, in the form of fire, at the dissolution of the world, consumes the whole universe, so also will the Sage Vishvamitra. Grant him, therefore, Indrahood, if he so desire it, for if You withhold brahmanhood which he has sought to acquire, then only the sovereignty of Indra’s region, will content him.”

Thus approached, Shri Brahma, accompanied by the gods, appeared before Shri Vishvamitra and in pleasing accents addressed him, saying: “O Brahmarishi, reverence to you, we are pleased with thine austerity. O Holy Vishvamitra, by the power of your penance, you have acquired brahmanhood. The gods bless you, may prosperity attend you, may longevity be thine I From to-day, you are free, now go where you pleases.”

Offering salutations to Shri Brahma and all the gods, Shri Vishvamitra said: “Having bestowed brahmanhood and longevity upon me, grant me instruction in the holy syllable ‘aum’ and the Vedas also, and further invest me with the authority to officiate at the sacrifice. O You Gods, let the son of Brahma, Shri Vasishtha, fully acquainted with the Vedic science, acknowledge me as a brahmarishi. If this desire of mine be fulfilled, you may all depart.”

Thereupon the gods appeared before Shri Vasishtha, who having acquiesced in their wish and sealed his friendship with Vishvamitra, said to him: “Verily you are now a brahmarishi and as such I acknowledge you.” Thereafter the gods returned to their own region. Thus did the illustrious Sage Vishvamitra acquire brahmanhood.

The divine sage then paid homage to the great Vasishtha and, his purpose accomplished, wandered about the earth engaged in charitable deeds. Shri Shatananda said: “O Rama, this is the story of Shri Vishvamitra and how he obtained brahmanhood. O Raghava, verily he is the chief of sages and the personification of Yoga. Constantly engaged in acts of virtue, he still performs rigorous penances.”

Having uttered these words, Shri Shatananda became silent.

When this excellent sage had ended his narrative, King Janaka in the presence of Rama and Lakshmana humbly addressed Shri Vishvamitra saying: “O Chief of Sages, blessed am I, that you are come with Shri Rama and Lakshmana to my sacrifice. O Muni, you have, by your presence, done us great honour. O Brahmarishi, you have added to our renown. Shri Rama, my counsellors and I have heard the story of your wonderful austerities and also of thine excellent qualities. O Great Sage, immense is your power, unimaginable your penances, incalculable your virtues, nor does one ever tire of hearing of your marvellous deeds. O Illustrious Lord, the sun has set and the time of evening devotion is near, graciously grant us leave to depart; in the morning we shall see you again.”

Shri Vishvamitra gratified by the king’s words, praised him and granted him permission to depart, upon which King Janaka rose and circumambulating the great sage took his departure, accompanied by his spiritual preceptor and relatives.

Honoured by the sages, the great Vishvamitra with Shri Rama and Lakshmana also returned to his abode.