While Bharata was relating his dream, the messengers from Ayodhya, overcome with weariness, entered the city of Raja-grahapura within the impassable moat.

Having approached the King of Kaikeya and the heir-apparent, Prince Yudhajita, and being received by them with due hospitality, they addressed Prince Bharata saying: “The chief priest, Shri Vasishtha and his counsellors send their greetings! Return speedily to Ayodhya, an urgent matter awaits your attention there. O Great Prince, taking these precious robes and jewelled ornaments sent to you, present them to your maternal uncle.”

Shri Bharata, accepting the gifts offered them to his maternal uncle with great affection, then making provision for the messengers and entertaining them duly, he afterwards said to them: “O Messengers, is my father the king well? Is the great Ramacandra well, and my brother Prince Lakshmana? Is the Queen Kaushalya, the upholder of dharma, in good health? She who is virtuous and a patron of brahmins, who is ever to be worshipped, who is wise and the chief queen? Is the second of my father’s queens, Sumitra the mother of Lakshmana and Shatrughna, well? And my mother Kaikeyi, self-willed, given to anger, arrogant and accounting herself wise, is it well with her? What message has she sent to me?”

The messengers thus addressed by Prince Bharata, answered with respect: “O Lion among Men, those whose welfare is dear to you, are well. Prosperity awaits you, therefore, summon your chariot.”

Prince Bharata said: “I will seek permission of the king to depart and inform him I must go without delay.”

Thus, dismissing the messengers, Prince Bharata approached his grandfather and said: “Your Majesty, urged by the messengers, I wish to return to my father in haste, I will come again, when you are pleased to call me.”

King Kaikeya smelling the head of the prince, addressed him in comfortable words, saying: “O Bharata, Kaikeyi is blessed in you, a virtuous son! Carry my greetings to your mother and father. Salute also the holy Sage Vasishtha, and the wise and pious brahmins in my name and greet the mighty warriors Rama and Lakshmana.”

King Kaikeya, then, bidding Bharata farewell, commending him, gave him great elephants and precious shawls, woollen cloths and deerskins. He gave him also with great veneration, much wealth, two thousand necklaces, coral and gold ornaments and sixteen hundred excellent horses. He sent also wise and trustworthy counsellors to attend him. Then Prince Yudhajita gave Bharata two stately elephants named Iravata and Indrasihra and many mules to transport his gifts. His unde gave him also certain fierce dogs, bred in the palace with large teeth equalling tigers in strength.

Shri Bharata praised the gifts conferred on him and sought permission to leave without delay. His heart was heavy on account of his fearful dream and the urgency of the messengers.

The prince came forth from the inner apartments of the palace and, surrounded by elephants and horses, stood on the royal highway. Entering the king’s apartment, unchallenged, Shri Bharata bade farewell to all, then mounting his chariot with Prince Shatrughna, he started on his journey. Servants, horses, camels, bulls and mules followed the chariot of the prince. Escorted by the private counsellors of the king, together with the army, the patient and highly valiant Bharata together with Shatrughna left the palace fearlessly, as the perfected ones leave the region of Indra.