Now, commanded by Prince Bharata, water diviners, expert and industrious mechanics, builders of bridges, wheelwrights, men able to perform all kinds of work, woodcutters, artisans skilled in the sinking of wells, labourers, hewers of wood, cooks and those acquainted with the way, set forth. The multitude of people advancing, appeared astonishing, like the sea under the full moon.

Those proficient in various ways, equipped with axes and other implements, advanced in groups, cutting through trees, shrubs, bushes and rocks, levelling them and hewing out a path; planting trees where these were needed, they cut back the branches of others that obstructed the way. Strong men set fire to tree trunks and cleared the road, levelling the uneven places with clay and filling the ditches. Others bridged the small rivers and brooks and swept the road clear of pebbles and thorns, pulverizing the rocks that impeded the flow of water. They speedily built barriers to dam the small streams and deepened the ponds by digging in many places. They also sank wells where water was scarce, and built platforms on which men could rest. Lime was spread on the road, trees were planted where birds sang and the highway appeared as if adorned with banners. Sprinkled with the essence of sandalwood and decorated with flowering branches, it resembled the pathvay of the Gods.

Those skilled in building prepared dwellings on pleasant sites near fresh water and fruit trees. Camps were set up for the army in accordance with Prince Bharata’s instructions and all that was needed was provided.

Those acquainted with the auspicious planetary positions erected quarters for the illustrious Bharata. Bordered by deep moats with intersecting roads, these camps were as lofty as the blue mountain.

Stately white temples were set up, and rows of houses, bordering the roads, were adorned with flags.

The balconies on the buildings, elevated like dovecotes, resembled the abode of the gods, and the whole arena rivalled Indra’s capital.

The way prepared for Prince Bharata, extended to the banks of the Ganges in whose cool waters fishes glided, as it flowed between woods and forests, and that royal highway, erected by skilled artisans, appeared as beautiful as the night sky, adorned by moon and stars.