Hearing these words, Vaidehi, though still distressed, ceased to tremble and placed a blade of grass between herself and Ravana, saying:—

“King Dasaratha, the indestructible rampart of justice, whose piety brought him renown, had a son, Raghava. Famed in the Three Worlds, that virtuous one, possessed of powerful arms and large eyes, is my God and my lord. It is he, that hero, born in the House of Ikshvaku, illustrious, possessing shoulders like unto a lion’s, who, with his brother Lakshmana will rob you of your life!

“Hadst you laid violent hands on me in his presence, he would have compelled you to refrain and would have slain you in single combat, even as he slew Khara himself in Janasthana. Those titans of grim visage, whom you dost extol to me, valiant though they be, would be deprived of their power in Raghava’s presence, as serpents yield up their poison before Suparna. Those golden shafts, loosed from the string of Rama’s bow, would pierce their bodies, as the Ganges bears away her banks! Though you mayest not be slain by Asuras or Gods, yet now that you have incurred the fury of Raghava, you will not escape alive.

“You have but a short time to live! Raghava will compass thine end 1 That life which you deemest impossible to lose is as a beast’s bound to the sacrificial stake! If Rama lets fall on you his glance inflamed with ire, you will instantly be consumed, O Titan, as Mamatha by Rudra! He, who is able to bring down the moon from the skies and destroy it or dry up the ocean, is assuredly able to deliver Sita. Your life, your prosperity, your being and faculties are forfeit; Lanka, bereft of its inhabitants, will be left desolate through your fault. Nay, this outrage will bring you nought but misfortune, O You who in the absence of my lord didst bear me away by force, never more will you know felicity!

“My illustrious lord, accompanied by his brother, depending on his own energy, does not fear to live in the Dandaka Forest. Your prowess, your strength, thine arrogance and your presumption, will all be wiped out under the rain of his shafts in battle. When the hour, appointed by destiny for the destruction of beings, is at hand, they become mad under its sway. Mine abduction presages thine end and that of the titans and of those dwelling in the inner apartments. As an untouchable may not approach the sacred altar, furnished with ladles and vessels of worship at the time of sacrifice, so the legitimate spouse of one fixed in virtue, faithful to his vows, may not be approached by a sinner such as you, O Last of the Titans!

“How should a royal swan, sporting amidst the tufts of lotuses with her mate, concern herself with a cormorant on the bank? Bind or destroy this insentient body, I have neither desire to preserve it nor my life, O Titan, for I will never submit to dishonour.”

After speaking thus in her wrath, causing the blood to freeze, Vaidehi became silent, and Ravana answered her in menacing tones, saying: “Reflect well, O Lovely Princess; if you dost not yield to me within the period of twelve months, my cooks shall cut you to pieces for my morning repast.”

Having spoken thus, Ravana, the Challenger of His Foes, exceedingly wroth, addressed those female titans in these words:—

“You terrible demons of ferocious aspect, who subsist on flesh and blood, do you instantly crush the pride of this woman!”

When he had said this, those monsters of fearful aspect, joining hands, surrounded Maithili, and Ravana commanded those women, formidable to look upon, who walking struck the earth with such force that it shook, saying:—

“Do you take Maithili to the centre of the Ashoka grove, and there, encircling her mount guard over her secretly, and sometimes by menaces and at others by soft speech seek in every way to break her will, as one would a female elephant.”

Thus commanded by Ravana, those titan woman, taking hold of Maithili, dragged her to the Ashoka grove which was planted with trees covered with flowers of every kind and many fruits, able to satisfy every desire, where birds disported themselves in love.

And, as a gazelle in the midst of tigresses, Sita, the daughter of Janaka, her limbs giving way under her despair, fell under the sway of those titans.

Like a timid antelope taken in a snare, Maithili, the daughter of Janaka, overwhelmed with grief and fear, could find no relief. And threatened by those terrible monsters, the Princess of Mithila, unable to rest, remembering her lord and beloved brother-in-law, under the weight of terror and sorrow, swooned away.