Overcome by grief and wailing like one orphaned, Rama, sick at heart, was plunged in misery, whereupon Lakshmana, the son of Sumitra, taking hold of his feet and pressing them, sought to console and comfort him, saying:—

“By great austerity and innumerable pious acts did the King Dasaratha obtain you, as the Celestials acquired the Nectar of Immortality. Bound to you by your virtues, that great monarch on your departure returned to the heavenly region, thus have we heard from Bharata. If you are not able to endure the calamity that has overtaken you, then how should an ordinary man do so?

“O Chief of Men, take courage! What living being is not subject to adversity, which approaches like a flame and instantly passes away? Even so is the world. Did not Yayati, the son of Nahusha, fall from heaven overcome by ill fortune? In a single day the great Sage Vasishtha, the chief priest of our sire, was bereft of four hundred sons born to him; and the Mother of the World, the Earth herself, revered by all, is sometimes known to tremble, O Master of Koshala! The sun and moon, the eyes of the world, the very symbols of virtue by whom all things are ordered, suffer eclipse. Those great beings, the Gods themselves, are subject to fate, O Lion among Men; how much more man? It is said that even Indra and the Gods endure vicissitudes; it does not behove you, therefore, to lament.

“Even should Vaidehi be dead or carried away, O Raghava, it is not worthy of you to yield to despair like a common man. Thine equals are never moved even in the greatest perils but look on all with equanimity, O Kakutstha!

“O You Best of Men, after due consideration, discriminate between that which is good and that which is evil; persons of right wisdom are ever cognizant of what is right or wrong. Owing to the element of uncertainty, one cannot at once distinguish the advantage or disadvantage of a deed, but if one fails to act the desired result will not take place. Thus hast you often instructed me, O Hero, and who is able to teach you anything? Not even Brihaspati himself. Even the Gods are powerless to fix the limit of your wisdom, O You of Mighty Intellect.

“I would fain arouse the power that sorrow has quenched in ‘you! Having reflected on the strength of the Gods, of men and of thyself, O Lion of the Ikshvakus, prepare to overcome thine enemies! Of what use were it for you to destroy the world, O You Best of Men? Seek out your perfidious adversary and put an end to his life I”.