Having stricken the sons of Shri Vasishtha by the power of his asceticism, Vishvamitra, seated amidst the sages, spoke:—

“The renowned monarch Trishanku of the dynasty of Ikshvaku, who is both magnanimous and virtuous, has taken refuge with me. He is desirous of entering heaven in his embodied state, it is for me to accomplish it. O Sages, do you unitedly assist him in this sacrifice.”

The sages hearing the words of Vishvamitra and being acquainted with the tradition, consulted together saying: “The son of Kaushika, the Rishi Vishvamitra, is given to wrath. If we do not fulfil his desire, like a consuming fire he will pour out his curse upon us. Let us, therefore, assist him in the sacrifice so that the king may enter heaven in his physical body. Now let us inaugurate the rites.”

Then the rites began, as prescribed by ancient tradition, Vishvamitra acting as the chief priest and the learned brahmins becoming the sacrificing priests subordinate to him. Observing numerous rituals, the sacrifice continued for a long time. Then Shri Vishvamitra called thither the gods for their share of the sacrifice, but none of these celestial beings appeared. At this the great sage grew exceedingly wroth and lifting up the sacrificial vessel, said to the King Trishanku: “O King, behold the power of my asceticism by virtue of which I now send you to heaven in your embodied state. O King, though it is deemed impossible to accomplish this, by the power acquired by me I now say to you; ‘ascend to heaven in your physical form.’”

Having uttered these words, King Trishanku, in the presence of the sages instantly ascended to the heavens.

Seeing Trishanku there, Indra and all the other gods exclaimed: “O Trishanku, you have no place in heaven. Cursed by your Guru, O Stupid Wretch, do you fall headlong to the earth.”

Trishanku accordingly instantly began to fall towards the earth crying out to Shri Vishvamitra, “Protect me”, “Protect me”.

Shri Vishvamitra, hearing the cry, grew angry, and called out, “Stay, Stay”. At that moment, standing amidst the sages, the great rishi resembled Prajapati. Thereafter he created seven planets in the southern quarter called the Seven Rishis, and then he created the Ashvini and twenty-seven other stars. Seated amidst the sages, filled with wrath, Vishvamitra reflected in himself: “I will create another Indra or I will leave this heaven without an Indra. Nay, I will make Trishanku Lord of this heaven,” and he began to create a new circle of gods.

Upon this, the sages, gods and celestial beings, bewildered and perturbed, approached Vishvamitra and said with humility: “O Great Sage, this king has been cursed by his spiritual preceptor and is not worthy of heaven.”

Shri Vishvamitra answered them, saying: “Hear, O you Gods, I have vowed that this king should enter heaven in his embodied state, this pledge must be fulfilled. To this end, I have created the Pole star and other planets and this heaven will abide as long as the former heaven endures, as also the gods created by me, it becomes you, therefore, to confirm what I have promised.”

The gods in awe, having heard these words, answered: “Be it so, O Illustrious Rishi, the heaven created by you shall endure beyond the Path of Vishvanara, and let Trishanku, suspended head downwards, remain as if immortal among these shining stars. As the stars attend on famous and successful men, so let these brilliant luminaries, created by you, attend on King Trishanku.”

Shri Vishvamitra, extolled by the gods, acquiesced in their proposal.

After this, O Rama, the gods and the ascetics who had attended the sacrifice, returned to their own regions.