“The grandsire Shri Brahma, hearing the words of the gods regarding the sons of King Sagara, who were already doomed, said:—

“‘O Devas, this whole world belongs to the glorious Vasudeva and he, in the form of the Sage Kapila, supports it. These princes will fall victims to the wrath of holy Kapila; the earth is eternal and cannot be destroyed.’

The gods, hearing these words, returned to their own regions, full of joy.

“Meanwhile, the uproar caused by the sons of Sagara digging the earth resembled the crash of thunder.

“Having encompassed the whole world, they returned to their father and said:

‘We have traversed the whole world and have slain gods, demons and snakes, but we have found no trace of the sacrificial horse nor of the thief. O Father, may prosperity attend you, be pleased to reflect on the matter and give us further instructions.’

“The great monarch replied in anger:

‘Go, dig the earth once more, capture the horse, accomplish your purpose, then return.’

“In accordance with the command of their royal sire, the princes once more renewed their tunnelling and came upon the monstrous form of a great elephant which resembled a mountain.

“O Prince of Raghu, the whole earth and the mountains of that quarter are supported by that elephant Vimpaksha, and whenever, from fatigue, he moves his feet to ease himself, the whole world trembles and quakes.

“The princes bowed down to him and circumambulated him. They then continued digging deeper and deeper, first to the east, then to the west. To the south they saw the second great elephant whose name was Mahapadma. They beheld him supporting that quarter of the earth and were astonished; they offered him salutations.

“O Prince, the sons of King Sagara next dug the northern quarter of the earth and saw there a white elephant which resembled a heap of snow. His name was Hima-Pandara and his form was gigantic; they worshipped him as he stood supporting that quarter of the earth.

“Then with furious zeal, those mighty and valiant sons of Sagara dug the earth and proceeded to that renowned quarter where they saw Kapila the eternal Lord Vasudeva and the horse grazing near him.

“O Rama, they were glad, thinking that it was Shri Kapila who had stolen the horse.

Full of wrath, seizing ploughs, trees, rocks and stones, they ran towards him, crying:

‘You are the stealer of the sacrificial horse, you are the thief. O Wicked One, we, the sons of King Sagara, have found you.’

“O Rama, Shri Kapila, hearing these words, filled with rage, uttered the sound ‘H’m’ and instantly by his immeasurable power all the sons of Sagara were reduced to ashes.”