Shri Rama, remembering his father’s command, had travelled far through the night. Day dawned while he was still journeying; offering up his morning prayer, he continued on his way, soon reaching the southern boundary of Koshala.

Enjoying the cultivated fields, the forests, and trees laden with blossom, he drove on, drawn by swift horses. As he passed, he heard the people of the villages and hamlets conversing thus: “Woe unto King Dasaratha enslaved by concupiscence. Ah! how hard is the heart of the wicked Kaikeyi, how cruel her disposition; violating the ancient tradition, she has performed this evil deed, she who has banished the Prince of Light, who is erudite, compassionate and self-controlled. How will the daughter of King Janaka, brought up in ease, endure the hardships of the forest? Alas! The king has no love for his son or he would not have abandoned one so perfect, who is devoted to the welfare of all.”

Hearing the words of the villagers, Shri Rama pressed on quickly and crossed the boundary of Koshala. Then fording the river Vedasruti, a pure stream, he proceeded south. After traversing a great distance, he came to the cool waters of the Gaumati flowing towards the sea, with many cows grazing on its banks. The swift steeds, restrained by Rama, crossed this river and then the Syandika, on whose banks peacocks and ducks were heard. Rama here showed Sita the land formerly given by Manu to Ikshvaku, a spacious and open country of many principalities. Then Shri Rama, whose voice resembled an enchanted swan, addressed Sumantra, saying: “O Charioteer, when will the day come, when I, returning from the forest in company with my parents, will sport in the flowering woods of Sarayu? To hunt in the forest is the prerogative of royal sages. It is the favourite pursuit of kings and others also incline to it. I do not deem it evil and desire to engage in it when the season of my austerities is over.”

Thus firm in his purpose, Shri Ramacandra continued to converse sweetly with Sumantra.