Early in the morning, the prince rose and mounting an excellent chariot, set out in haste, desirous of seeing Rama. Shri Bharata’s chariot was preceded by ministers on horseback and priests in coaches and shone like the vehicle of the sun. Nine thousand richly bedecked elephants and sixty thousand carts with archers, together with a hundred thousand troops, accompanied the self-controlled prince, the devotee of truth. Kaikeyi, Sumitra and the renowned Kaushalya riding in resplendent chariots, went forward to bring Rama home. The multitude of the twice born proceeding from the capital, conversed solely of Shri Ramacandra and listened only to that which related to him. They said: “When shall we behold Shri Rama, that cloud-complexioned, mighty armed one, of fixed purpose; the destroyer of the grief of the world? As the rising sun ends the darkness of the earth, so by the mere beholding of Shri Rama will our grief disappear.”

Conversing thus of Rama and embracing each other, the citizens went forward, filled with gladness.

The foremost merchants of Ayodhya who had received permission from Bharata to accompany him, also those who had not been so favoured and others, went forward happily to meet Rama. Skilful engravers, potters, weavers and workers in gems, those who made fans of peacocks’ feathers, woodcutters, plasterers, workers in glass and ivory, masons and perfumers, famous goldsmiths, makers of woollen cloth, washermen, masseurs, appliers of unguents, physicians and those who fumigated the dwellings with incense, also retailers of wine were present. Fullers, tailors, chiefs of villages, cowherds, dancing men and women, fishermen, and countless Vedic scholars of subdued mind, devoted to Rama, followed Prince Bharata in carts drawn by bullocks. All apparelled in pure raiment, their bodies anointed with red sandalwood, mounted on vehicles of various kinds, followed in the wake of Prince Bharata. The leaders of the army joyfully accompanied the prince, now going forth to bring Prince Rama home.

Mounted in chariots, palanquins, bullock carts or on horses and elephants, the people proceeded a considerable distance and reached the banks of the Ganges at Shrangaverapur, where the friend of Shri Rama, Guha, dwelt with his people, guarding his country with vigilance. Arriving at the banks of Shri Ganga, the haunt of the cakravaka bird, those following the prince halted. The eloquent Bharata, seeing the beautiful Ganges, reviewed his troops and said to his ministers:—

“Let the whole army camp here to-night, to-morrow we will cross the river. Now I desire to offer a libation to the spirit of my father, the king!”

His counsellors replied, “Be it so, O Prince”, and caused the people to halt there, each according to his rank. The saintly Bharata alone in his tent, on the banks of the Ganges reflected anxiously how he might best bring Shri Rama home.