“O Rama, learning that her children had been slain, Diti was much afflicted and approached her husband Kasyapa with the words:

‘O Lord, by your powerful sons, am I bereft of my children. I desire a son who will be able to destroy Indra, though to this end I must undergo great penance. Such austerities I will perform, if you will grant me a son that is mighty, valorous, strong-willed and firm of purpose.’

“The holy sage answered the afflicted Diti saying:

‘Be it so! Remain chaste for a thousand years, you shalt then bear a son capable of destroying Indra. By my grace, your child shall be the ruler of the three worlds.’

“Thus did the sage console Diti, and blessing her, departed to practise penance. Diti retired contentedly to the forest of Kushaplava and began to undergo severe austerities.

“Indra then, coming there, paid reverence to her and began to serve her with humility, supplying her with fire, kusha grass and other necessities, massaging her body when she became weak from the severity of ascetic practices. O Rama, Indra served Diti for a thousand years less ten days.

“Then Diti joyfully addressed Indra saying:

‘O Indra, your father has promised to grant me a son after a thousand years penance. You shalt soon behold your brother, whom I desire shall overcome you. With him you shalt share the three worlds and be happy, have no anxiety.’

“By this time the afternoon had come. Diti overcome with sleep, placing her feet where her head had lain, carelessly assumed an impure posture.

“Indra rejoiced and laughed aloud. Entering her body, he cut the foetus into seven pieces with his great mace. Diti’s slumber was interrupted by the cry of the child in her womb.

Indra said to it ‘Do not weep’, ‘Do not weep’, and again divided the child with his mace, despite Diti’s cries, ‘Do not destroy it, do not destroy it’.

“Then Indra paused in his murderous assault and with extreme humility addressed Diti saying

‘O Did, you wast impure through sleeping with your feet towards the head of the couch, you did’st thus occupy an improper posture. I have, therefore, severed thine unborn child into seven parts, since he was to be the cause of my destruction. O Devi, pardon me’.”