King Kakutstha woke up to beautiful music!  His people were so happy to have him as their king.  They sang wonderful songs about how brave and wise he was. They said he was as strong as the god Vishnu, as handsome as the Ashvins, and as smart as Brihaspati!  They praised him for being kind and always caring for his people.

King Kakutstha got up, washed, and went to pray.  Then, he went to the special place for the Ikshvaku kings. He prayed to the gods and his ancestors.  Rama, his son, was there too!  Rama was surrounded by his family: his brothers Bharata, Lakshmana, and Shatrughna,  lots of helpers,  and even monkeys and some friendly giants (Rakshasas) led by Sugriva and Vibhishana!  Everyone bowed to Rama, their wonderful king.

Rama asked a wise man, Sage Agastya, about Sugriva and Bali, two powerful monkey brothers.  Agastya told Rama a very old story:

Long ago, a tear from the god Brahma fell to earth and became a monkey named Riksharajas.  Brahma told Riksharajas to live on Mount Meru.  Riksharajas loved to bring Brahma beautiful flowers and fruits.  One day, he was very thirsty. He saw his reflection in a lake and thought it was an enemy!  He jumped in, and when he came out, he was a beautiful woman!

The gods Indra and Surya (the sun god) saw the woman and each had a son with her.  Indra’s son was Bali, and Surya’s son was Sugriva.  Riksharajas turned back into a monkey, and he became the father and mother of Bali and Sugriva!  Brahma gave Riksharajas a wonderful city called Kishkindha to rule.


Agastya then told Rama about Ravana, the ten-headed king of the giants. Ravana had asked a wise man about the most powerful beings.  The wise man told him about a magical place called Sveta-dvipa where people were super strong because they worshipped the god Narayana.  Ravana went to fight them, but the women of Sveta-dvipa played with him like a toy! They tossed him around until he was scared and ran away.

Because Ravana wanted to be powerful like Narayana, and he knew Narayana would become Rama,  Ravana later kidnapped Sita, Rama's wife,  to make himself powerful.

After hearing all these stories, Rama was amazed! Agastya and everyone else left, and Rama went to bed.
