Hanuman, the super-strong monkey, wanted to find Sita.  Ravana, a mean king, had taken her away!  Hanuman was going to find her, no matter what.

He started his journey.  He was so strong, he jumped over hills!  He moved so fast, he scared the birds.  He even knocked down trees with his chest!  It was like watching a playful lion.

He reached a beautiful mountain.  It was full of shiny rocks and amazing creatures – friendly spirits and magical beings!  Hanuman bowed to the sun and all the other gods before starting his big trip.

He wanted to cross the ocean.  He got HUGE!  He stood on a mountain, and the mountain shook! Flowers rained down!  Water sprayed out like a crazy water fountain!  Gold, silver, and shiny stones poured out from the mountain!  Animals living inside screamed as the mountain was crushed by his weight!

Scared animals ran away.  Even magical people and wise hermits left their beautiful homes.  They saw Hanuman and knew what he was trying to do. They whispered, “This brave monkey is crossing the ocean to help Rama find Sita. It’s very hard!”

Hanuman roared like thunder!  He stretched his arms like giant sticks.  He took a deep breath.  Then… HE JUMPED!  He jumped so high, the trees flew into the air behind him!

He flew like an arrow!  He said, “I’ll get to Lanka (Ravana’s city) super fast! If I don’t find Sita, I’ll go to the gods' city! And if I still can’t find her, I’ll bring Ravana back in chains!”

Hanuman flew and flew.  The ocean was huge!  Sometimes he looked like he was drinking the whole ocean!  Sometimes he seemed like he'd swallow the sky!  His shadow was as big as a city!

The ocean was worried!  The sea talked to a golden mountain, Mainaka.  "Help this brave monkey! He’s tired!" Mainaka rose up from the sea, like a giant mountain coming up for air!

Hanuman saw the mountain and thought, “Oh no, another problem!” But he jumped over it!  Mainaka was happy to help. He offered Hanuman a rest and some yummy fruits. Hanuman thanked him but said, "No time to rest! I have to find Sita!"

Then, a giant snake lady, Surasa, wanted to eat Hanuman!  She opened her mouth wide, wide, WIDE!  But Hanuman got even bigger than her mouth and went right through her, like a tiny mouse through a giant door!  Surasa was amazed!  She said, "Go, do your best!”

Another scary monster, Singhika, tried to grab Hanuman's shadow.  But Hanuman got even bigger and stronger. He jumped into Singhika's mouth and defeated her!

Finally, Hanuman landed on a mountain near Lanka.  He knew the demons would be looking for him, so he shrunk back to his normal size. He was ready to find Sita! He had crossed the big ocean, all by himself! The gods and everyone else cheered for him. He was a super hero!
