The dark-complexioned, lotus-eyed Ramacandra, that peerless prince, instructed his minister to announce his arrival to the Icing. On this, Sumantra entering the royal apartment, beheld the king sorely distressed, lamenting bitterly, like the sun under eclipse or a fire buried in ashes or a lake without water.

The learned Sumantra with joined palms, addressed the sorely grieving monarch by praising him in a fitting manner and offering obeisance, he said: “Jai to you, O King.” Then, falteringly, in low and gentle accents he added: “O King, your son Rama, that Lion among men, is at your door, having distributed his whole wealth to the pious brahmins and servants; now having taken leave of his friends, he wishes to approach you. Clothed with every excellent quality as the sun with its rays, he is about to depart for the forest, be pleased to receive him, O Sire.”

The virtuous monarch, the knower of dharma, profound as the sea, pure as the sky, spoke: “O Sumantra, summon the ladies of the court, I wish to see Rama in their presence.”

Entering the private apartments of the queens, Sumantra said: “His majesty demands your presence, go to him without delay.” Thus addressed by Sumantra, in obedience to the wishes of their consort, they prepared to approach the king. Three hundred and fifty women, their eyes reddened with weeping on account of Rama’s departure, surrounding Queen Kaushalya, slowly advanced towards the king. They being present, the king commanded Sumantra to bring his son before him.

Sumantra bringing Shri Rama, Lakshmana and Sita with him, speedily entered the apartment of the king. The monarch beholding Shri Rama approaching, rose from his seat, and ran towards him in haste, with his consorts, but ere he reached him fell senseless to the earth.

Then Shri Rama and Lakshmana advancing, lifted up the king who had been rendered unconscious by grief and suffering. The palace resounded with the lamentations of a thousand women crying, “Rama, Rama”, “Alas! Alas!” the tinkling of their ornaments, drowned in the tumult of their cries.

Shri Rama and Lakshmana supporting the king in their arms, conveyed him to the couch, and after a long time, he revived. Then Shri Ramacandra addressed the monarch who was sinking in the ocean of grief, and said: “O Great King, Master of All, I am about to enter the Dandaka forest, be gracious enough to look on me with favour. Grant also that Lakshmana and Sita accompany me, since they, setting aside my counsel that they should remain here, have with fixed purpose, resolved to follow me. O Sire, giving up grief, command us, as Prajapati commands his subjects.”

His eyes filled with compassion, fixing his gaze on his beloved son, the king, knowing him to be about to enter the forest with a serene heart, said: “O Ramacandra, I have been deceived by Queen Kaikeyi by reason of a promise, do you, setting me aside, seize the kingdom of Ayodhya by force.”

Hearing the king’s words, Rama, eminent in virtue, spoke eloquently and humbly: “My Lord, may God grant you yet a thousand years to live and rule the earth 1 Desirous of following truth, I shall assuredly enter the forest, dwelling there fourteen years. I shall then return to serve you and offer you homage.”

Held fast in the toils of truth, the king, urged on by Kaikeyi, wept and full of distress, answered: “O Child, to attain felicity in the other world and renown on earth and for the sake of your return, enter the forest with a peaceful heart. May no fear from any source visit you on the way. O Ramacandra, firm in truth and in the performance of duty, none can divert you from the path of righteousness. O My Son, do not yet depart, stay one more night with your mother and me. Satisfied after the night, early in the morning, do you set out for the forest. My Child, for my sake, you have undertaken that which none can accomplish. For my good and my future happiness, you have chosen to enter the forest. O Child, in truth, I cannot suffer your departure but am helpless. Deceived by Kaikeyi, whose designs resemble a fire covered with ashes, I am caught in this snare, but why must you also suffer? O Child, what wonder that you, my eldest son, should desire your father to uphold the truth.”

Hearing the words of his afflicted parent, Shri Rama, deeply distressed, answered: “O Father, if to-day I should remain happily in the royal palace, what of to-morrow? Therefore, with your permission, I would fain leave at once. Let your kingdom, filled with wealth and grain, inhabited by your subjects, surrounded by tributary states, be given to Prince Bharata! O Giver of Boons, my resolution to enter the forest is fixed. Thus hast you ordained! I shall reside in the forest for fourteen years with the ascetics. Do you, without delay, give the kingdom to Bharata! I desire nought, nor is happiness as dear to me as obedience to your commands. O My Father, do not grieve, nor be distressed; the mighty ocean, Lord of the Rivers, does not overstep its bounds. O Sire, I desire neither kingdom nor pleasure, nor even Janaki, nor delight, nor heaven, nor life itself, but only wish to see you the votary of truth. O My Father, you are as a god to me, I vow by the truth and the merits acquired by me that my words are free from the taint of hypocrisy. O My Father and Lord, I cannot remain here a moment longer; restrain your grief, nothing can move me from my resolve. When Kaikeyi commanded me to enter the forest, I answered “I will go”, therefore, true to my word, I shall depart. Do not be distressed, O My Lord, I shall live in the forest where peaceful deer abound and birds sing their beautiful lays. O Father, a father is said to be the god of gods; knowing you to be a supreme deity, I am obedient to your behests. O August King, I shall easily pass fourteen years in the forest and then return to you. Now it becomes you to pacify those afflicted and sorrowful. O Lion among men, fulfil your duty and do not fall a victim to grief. I renounce the capital the kingdom and the earth; let them be given to Bharata. Without hesitation I shall follow your command and enter the forest. Let this kingdom adorned by high mountains and deep forests, filled with cities and villages, be ruled by Prince Bharata according to dharma. Let your word be fulfilled. O King, my heart is not given to delights nor to any object of pleasure, all I desire is to carry out your commands, approved by virtuous men. O King, give up all sorrow for my sake; I neither desire happiness nor wealth, nor the earth, nor Janaki, nay not even life. I desire the world to know you as the votary of truth. O My Lord, be happy. I, entering the forest filled with many kinds of trees, viewing the mountains and rivers, shall dwell joyfully, living on fruits and roots.”

The king filled with anguish, embraced his son and fell senseless to the earth. The queens all began to lament, save Kaikeyi alone. Then the aged Sumantra also fell unconscious and the whole palace was filled with lamentation.