The people of the capital, deeply devoted to Shri Rama, the Upholder of Truth, followed him on his way to the forest. Though King Dasaratha, on the advice of his ministers, turned back, the citizens of Ayodhya continued to run beside the chariot of Rama. The inhabitants of the city were devoted to Rama whose virtues rendered him resplendent like the full moon, and weeping piteously, implored the holy prince to return, but Rama, determined to prove his father to be true to his word, pressed on towards the forest. They, looking on Rama as a thirsty man looks on water, were addressed by him with tender affection as a father addresses his children.

He said: “O You People of Ayodhya, for my sake bestow the love and honour shown to me, in even greater measure, on Bharata! Prince Bharata, who is of an excellent disposition, will assuredly deal benevolently with you and endear himself to you. Though young, he is wise, gentle and endowed with great courage. Warm-hearted and charitable, you will have no cause for fear on his accession to the throne. King Dasaratha has appointed him heir-apparent in consideration of his great virtue, we should therefore obey the king. When I am absent in the forest, you should so act towards him as to occasion him no distress. Do you, desirous of pleasing me, obey the king.”

Rama, instructing the people to obey the king again and again only increased their desire to see him as their sovereign. It appeared that Rama with Lakshmana drew the distressed and weeping inhabitants of the city after them as if bound by a cord.

Among the elders in age, wisdom and austerity, the first, their heads trembling with advanced years, calling from a distance, said: “O You Swift and Excellent Steeds, return, return, do not proceed further and favour Rama. All beings are endowed with perception, but you excel in the sense of hearing, therefore hear our entreaty and turn back. We know the heart of our master to be simple and gentle, we know him to be a hero firm in his vows, therefore, return to Ayodhya, do not carry Rama away from the city to the forest.”

Hearing the lament of the aged brahmins and perceiving their distress, Shri Rama, causing the chariot to halt, dismounted. With Lakshmana and Sita, he walked towards the forest, followed by the multitude, proceeding slowly on foot. The ever virtuous and compassionate Rama was unable to endure the sight of the aged brahmins walking on foot, far behind the chariot.

The brahmins seeing Rama did not return, despite their supplications, but still proceeded towards the forest, were troubled and overcome with distress, cried: “O Rama, you are a friend of the brahmins and the whole caste is following you with the sacred fire borne on their shoulders. See, we are carrying the holy canopies, like autumn clouds, obtained by us by observing the Vajapeya ceremony. By covering you with their shade, we will protect you from the rays of the sun. O Child, formerly your mind was set on the study of the Veda, but now you are determined to enter the forest. Our only wealth, the Veda, we have stored in our memory and our consorts are at home, protected by their conjugal devotion. There is no cause for further reflection, we are determined to go with you! If you dost not walk in the path of dharma, who will follow it?

“O Rama, what more can be said? We, whose heads are white like swan’s down, offer humble salutations to you. Among us, some have entered upon their sacrifices, O Rama, their completion depends on you. Not we alone, but beasts, birds and trees, entreat you to return; have pity on all these. Trees desiring to follow you, prevented by their roots which penetrate deep into the earth, implore you not to depart, their branches bending low in the wind. See the birds, forgetting to seek their food, sit motionless on the trees, supplicating you who art compassionate to all.”

Thus lamenting, the brahmins beheld the river Tamasa as if obstructing the path of Rama, preventing his further progress.

Then Sumantra, loosing the tired horses, let them roll on the ground to relieve their fatigue and gave them to drink causing them to bathe in the river, and allowing them to graze on the banks of the Tamasa.