Seeing Lakshmana, cast down and dejected, approaching without Vaidehi, the virtuous son of Dasaratha enquired of him, saying:—

“O Lakshmana, where is Vaidehi, who followed me to the Dandaka Forest and whom you have left alone to come hither? Where is that one of graceful form, the companion of my misfortune when I was banished from my kingdom and, dispirited, roamed the Dandaka Forest; where is Sita, without whom I cannot live for an instant, my life’s companion, who resembled a daughter of the Gods?

“O Hero, separated from that daughter of Janaka, whose skin was like gold, I have neither a desire for the sovereignty of the Gods or the earth. O Lakshmana, Sita is dearer to me than life itself. O Saumitri, has my banishment been rendered void? If, on account of Sita, I should die and you return to the city alone, will it not prove the consummation of Kaikeyi’s desires and she find felicity? Will not Kaushalya, her son dead, become the abject slave of Kaikeyi when, having accomplished her design, she rules the dominion with her son? If Vaidehi still lives, I will return to the hermitage, but if my virtuous spouse be dead, I shall yield up my life, O Lakshmana! If on returning to the ashrama the daughter of Videha, whose words were ever preceded by a smile, does not speak to me, I shall renounce my life.

“Tell me, O Lakshmana, if Vaidehi is living or no, or whether in consequence of your leaving her that unfortunate creature has been devoured by the titans. Alas! The wretched Sita, so tender and fragile, never having experienced unhappiness, will be wholly desolate in mine absence. Did that titan, full of cunning and craft, crying out ‘O Lakshmana’, inspire you with fear? I surmise that Vaidehi, hearing that cry for help uttered in a voice resembling mine, besought you to find out what had become of me and you didst come hither with all speed. You have done an irretrievable wrong in abandoning Sita in the forest, thus affording those cruel and ruthless titans an opportunity for avenging themselves. Those flesh-eating demons are aggrieved on account of Khara’s death and now, without doubt, have slain Sita. Alas! I am wholly submerged in an ocean of sorrow, O Destroyer of your Foes! What shall I do now; I tremble before that which awaits me 1”

Thus immersed in the thought of Sita, that paragon among women, Raghava hastened towards Janasthana in company with Lakshmana.

Heaping reproaches on his younger brother, who was overwhelmed with distress, tormented by hunger, fatigue and thirst, Rama, sighing heavily, his countenance pale, a prey to despair, entered his hermitage and found it deserted.

Returning to the ashrama, that hero ran hither and thither where Sita was wont to disport herself and, recollecting those haunts where she used to roam, he became distracted, his hair standing on end.