Incited by Manthara, Kaikeyi, like a kinnari, continued to roll on the ground as if wounded by a poisoned arrow. The artful queen, devising a plan, gradually unfolded her design to Manthara. Heaving deep sighs, like a python, Manthara was filled with satisfaction, perceiving her favourite, Kaikeyi, resolved on her evil course of action.

Reflecting on the matter, torn with jealousy, the queen, plucking out her eyebrows, scattered her shining ornaments on the ground adorning it as stars illumine the firmament. Lying thus, attired in soiled raiment with her hair dishevelled, she resembled a nymph fallen from heaven.

The king, having given his instructions for the installation of Shri Rama, dismissed the court and entered the inner apartments of the queens to inform them of the great occasion.

Anxious to impart the good tidings to his beloved consorts, the illustrious King Dasaratha entered the inner apartment, first going to the beautiful abode of Kaikeyi. As the moon sails into a clear sky after eclipse, so did the king enter the apartment of Queen Kaikeyi. He passed through the garden made beautiful by parrots, peacocks, swans and cranes. Music was softly playing, while dwarfed and hunchbacked maids passed to and fro. There were leafy bowers and alcoves on whose walls were painted beautiful pictures. Everywhere champaka and asoka enhanced the view, whilst other trees were laden with blossom and fruit. Altars of ivory, silver and gold with springs of water flowing by seats inlaid with precious metals and costly jewels, where delicious food and drink was constantly served, transformed the palace into paradise itself.

The king entered the inner apartments, but did not perceive the queen on the couch where desire had caused him to seek her. Calling loudly and receiving no answer, he grew sad; never before had Kaikeyi missed the time of dalliance, never before had the king found the apartment deserted. The monarch desiring to know where the queen was, questioned a maidservant, who replied with fear and submission: “O Sire, she has entered the chamber of wrath.”

On hearing these words, the heart of the sovereign was exceedingly troubled. Restless and agitated in mind, the king bowed with sorrow entered the chamber of wrath and found the queen lying on the ground in an unseemly manner. The king who, in his old age, loved the young queen as dearly as his own life, was deeply afflicted at the sight. That sinless monarch beheld the ambitious Kaikeyi lying on the earth like a branch tom from a tree, or a nymph thrust forth from heaven. She lay like an apsara fallen on the earth when her merit is exhausted, or like a snapped garland, or a doe ensnared by the hunter, or like a young elephant wounded by a poisonous arrow.

Standing over her like an immense tusker, the monarch regarded her with affection. Gently caressing her, apprehensive yet propelled by desire, the king addressed his lotus-eyed queen: “O Devi, I know not why you are displeased, by whom hast you been insulted. O tell me! O Auspicious One, I am grieved to see you lying in the dust, why art you, ever benevolent towards me, lying on the earth? You are as dear to me as my own life, why dost you act as one possessed by an evil spirit? Art you sick? If so, I have many eminent physicians who can cure your malady, who being satisfied with the gifts and honours bestowed on them, are ready to obey my will. In an instant they shall restore you to health. O Beautiful One, tell me the symptoms of your complaint. Or dost you desire to reward or punish any man? Do not let the charm of your face be marred by grief.

“In order to please you, I will put to death one who does not deserve the penalty, or will pardon one who merits death. I will reduce a rich man to poverty, or cause a pauper to be made wealthy. I and all those who belong to me are your obedient servants. I shall never oppose your will, O Queen. If I can please you even at the cost of my life, you have but to speak. Well dost you know how much I love you, now tell me what I may do for you.

“I swear to accomplish whatever you desires. Know me to be monarch of a kingdom on which the sun never sets. The lands of Drivira, Sindhu, Sauvira, Sourashtra, Dakshinaputha, Vanga, Anga, Maghandha, Matsha, Kashi and Koshala together with their abundant produce and wealth are ruled by me. If you desirest any of these, tell me.

“O Frail One, why dost you cause thyself suffering? Rise, rise, O Dearest, what dost you fear? O Kaikeyi, as the sun dispels the mist, I will dispel your fears.”

Thus flattered by the king, Kaikeyi appeared somewhat pacified, yet in order to afflict her lord, began to utter bitter and harsh words.