The virtuous Ramacandra, devoted to truth reflecting on the hardships to be borne in the forest, in spite of Sita’s entreaty was unwilling to grant her request.

Once more, he addressed the weeping Sita, insisting she should not accompany him, saying: “O Sita, you are nobly born and devoted to the practice of virtue; remain here continuing to act righteously. O Frail Princess, act according to my will. Life in the forest is fraught with misery, O Sita, relinquish the thought of sharing my exile, many are the dangers there. The forest is named ‘Antara’, meaning it is unfit for human habitation. For thine own well-being, I advise you to remain here; in the forest there is no comfort. The rivers issuing from the mountains are difficult to cross, the lions roaring in the mountain caves strike terror in the heart and render the forest perilous; therefore, remain here. O Sita, many wild beasts wandering at will in the forest may assail you, therefore life there is full of danger. The deep marshes and the rivers infested with crocodiles are difficult to cross, even an elephant may find them impassable. Many savage elephants wander here and there; assuredly the forest is replete with perils. Waterless are the paths covered with thorns and poisonous creepers, there the hoarse cry of wild fowl re-echoes; the forest is a source of suffering. Wearied by journeying the traveller finds no silken pillows nor a soft couch, but at night must sleep on the bare earth, his bed the fallen leaves; verily the forest is a source of suffering! O Sita, in the forest, there is nought to eat save the fruit that has fallen from the trees; with this the traveller must be satisfied day and night, therefore the forest is a source of suffering! O Daughter of Mithila, fasting to the utmost extent, with matted locks, wearing robes of bark, one must constantly worship the devas and pittris and offer respectful hospitality to the unexpected guest. Thrice daily must ablutions be performed by those who live according to the prescribed ordinance, therefore, the forest is a source of suffering. O Youthful Princess, it is necessary to make offerings of flowers on the altars, plucked by one’s own hand, as ordained by the sages. A dweller in the forest must be satisfied with whatever food he can obtain, therefore the forest is a source of suffering. Great storms visit the forest, covering it with darkness by day; constant hunger and many other perils prevail there, therefore is it a source of suffering. O Beautiful One, great snakes and pythons dwell in the forest, serpents as tortuous as the currents of the river live in the waters and obstruct the traveller’s path, therefore the forest is a source of suffering. O Delicate Princess, scorpions, poisonous reptiles, hornets and mosquitoes afflict one constantly in the forest; therefore the forest is a source of suffering. O Charming Princess, the forest is filled with briars, harsh grass and gnarled trees obstructing the way, it is therefore a source of suffering. Life in the forest is full of conditions adverse to the body and manifold dangers, it is therefore a source of suffering. O Sita, a dweller in the forest must relinquish anger and avarice and practise severe penances, nor must fear visit him in the midst of alarms.

“Do not, therefore, consider entering the forest which is not meant to be your lot. Reflecting carefully, I see nought but suffering in the forest for you.”

Thus Rama disclosed his mind to Sita and sought to dissuade her from entering the forest, but the princess, sorely distressed, unable to consent to his counsel, then made answer.