Shri Anasuya, faithful to duty, listened to this stirring narrative and, taking hold of Shri Sita’s hands, embraced her, savouring the fragrance of her locks, then she addressed her, saying: “I have heard your tale brilliantly and lucidly set forth, which you have so singularly related to me. O Sweet-speaking One, I would fain hear more of your story, but the sun has gone down behind the Asatalachala mountain and the lovely night is near at hand. See 1 the birds who have sought food far and wide all the day, are now returning home to rest. Hark! how they sing! The holy ascetics, too, are returning from their bathing in their wet robes of bark with loshtas in their hands. The smoke, in hue resembling a pigeon’s neck, rising from the Sages’ sacred fires is being driven by the wind here and there. The bare trees, scarcely seen in the distance, appear like dense clouds in the gathering darkness. The light is slowly fading in every quarter. See, the rangers of the night are abroad and the deer of the Tapovana forest are sleeping round the sacred altars. Behold! O Sita! The night adorned with stars is come and the moon diffusing her light has appeared in the heavens.

“Do you go, O Princess, and minister to your lord, Shri Ramacandra. How fortunate am I to have had sweet converse with you! O Princess, do you attire thyself in these robes and ornaments, and thus increase my delight.”

Shri Sita adorning herself in the gorgeous apparel, placed her head at the feet of Anasuya and departed.

Shri Ramacandra, that most eloquent one, seeing Sita adorned with the ornaments given to her by Anasuya, was filled with joy. Shri Sita then told him of the liberality of the aged ascetic, and showed him all her gifts. Rare indeed were those gifts and Shri Rama and the great warrior Shri Lakshmana, rejoiced over the bounty of Anasuya.

The night passed and day dawned, the two princes bathed, performed their morning devotions and then approached the ascetics for food.

The pious hermits then addressed Shri Rama and said: “O Prince, it is dangerous to wander in the forest on account of the presence of asuras. O Prince, wandering about in various guises, these beings feed on human flesh and drink the blood of men. These creatures like wild beasts kill and devour any ascetic who is negligent or impure. O Prince, for our sake, do you destroy them. This path, O Prince, is the way by which the sages go to gather fruit, let it be your path also.”

Then the holy men humbly blessed Shri Rama and he, the harasser of his foes, entered the forest as the sun enters a dark doud.

END OF AYODHYA KANDA.