Listening to Shurpanakha’s reproaches, Khara, burning with anger, seated amidst his warriors, answered fiercely:—

“Your contempt incites me to ungovernable fury, I am beside myself and can no more endure this than it is possible to support salt poured into a wound. I hold Rama to be of no account and regard him as already dead. His offence will bring about his end this day; therefore restrain your tears, do not distress thyself further. I shall despatch Rama and his brother to the region of death, and you, O Rakshasi, shalt to-day drink the warm blood of that one of evil deeds struck down by mine axe.”

Overjoyed on hearing these words, falling from her brother’s lips, Shurpanakha, in her folly, began to praise Khara, the Foremost of Titans.

First condemned, then extolled by her, Khara called on Dushana, the commander of his army, saying:—

“O Friend, make ready fourteen thousand trained titans who are obedient to my commands, full of martial ardour, who never retreat in battle, who resemble thunder clouds and who revel in cruelty and delight in slaying men.

“Do you, with all speed, bring my chariot also, with bows, arrows, glittering swords, darts and javelins, that have been well sharpened. I wish to place myself at the head of those magnanimous titans, in order to slay the haughty Rama, O Skilful Warrior!”

As he was speaking, Dushana harnessed excellent horses to the great car, that shone like the sun, whereupon Khara ascended the chariot resembling the peak of Meru, that was vast, inlaid with pure gold, with golden wheels and shafts set with emeralds. Decorated with symbols of good fortune, such as fish, flowers, trees, rocks, mountains, birds and stars, it was furnished with banners and spears, hung with delightful bells and yoked to excellent steeds.

Then Khara, chafing with impatience, as also Dushana, seeing that great host, furnished with chariots, shields, weapons and banners, cried to that multitude of demons:—“Advance!”

Thereafter that mighty titan army, numbering fourteen thousand, equipped with formidable shields, weapons and banners, rushed out impetuously, amidst a great tumult.

Armed with hammers, picks, spears, sharp axes, sabres, discus and shining javelins, as well as darts, formidable clubs, immense bows, goads, swords, maces and thunderbolts, terrible to look upon, those ferocious titans, obedient to the commands of Khara, left Janasthana, and he, withdrawing himself a little, reviewed those titans of malignant aspect, who were rushing forth, and thereafter followed them.

Obedient to Khara’s command, the charioteer mounted on the car of that Slayer of His Foes, spurring on his dappled steeds, whose harness was wrought with pure gold, advanced with all speed, causing the cardinal points and other regions to ring with the sound.

And Khara, in harsh tones, inflamed with anger, chafing with the desire to destroy his adversary, endowed with great strength, equal to Antaka, urged on his charioteer again and again, roaring like a great cloud about to let loose a stream of hail.