Rama, having been treated with all honour by Sutikshna, passed the night in the ashrama with Saumitri, and waking at dawn bathed with Sita in the cool waters fragrant with the scent oflotuses.

At the proper time, having duly worshipped Agni and the Gods in that forest containing the retreats of the ascetics, Rama, Lakshmana and Videha’s daughter, observing the sun had risen, approached Sutikshna with courtesy, saying:—

“O Lord, you have ministered liberally to us and paid us every honour, now we ask leave to depart, since the ascetics who accompany us wish us to press on without delay.

“It is our wish to visit all the retreats inhabited by holy men of devout practices in the Dandaka Forest. We therefore beg to take leave of these great sages, fixed in their vows, purified by penance and resembling clear flames.

“We desire to go hence’ere the rays of the sun shine too fiercely and become unbearable, like one who has usurped royal prerogatives by unlawful means!”

Having spoken thus, Raghava with Saumitri and Sita, bowed down to the feet of the sage, and that Foremost of Ascetics, raising up those two heroes, clasped them affectionately to his heart and said:—

“Go your way safely, O Rama, in the company of Saumitri and Sita, who follows you like a shadow. Visit the entrancing solitudes of the Dandaka Forest, where those hermits dwell whose souls are purified by renunciation. You shalt see there woods abounding in fruit, roots and flowers, magnificent herds of deer, flocks of tame birds, tufts of lotus in bloom, tranquil lakes abounding in waterfowl, charming mountain springs and splendid cataracts falling from the hills with marvellous groves echoing to the peacock’s cry. Go, O Child, and you also, Sumitra’s son; then come again to this retreat when you have seen all.”

Thus addressed, Kakutstha and Lakshmana answered:—“Be it so!” and circumambulating the sage, prepared to depart.

Thereafter the large-eyed Sita handed those brothers their excellent quivers, bows and shining swords, and taking leave of the great sages the two descendants of the House of Raghu, of unsurpassed beauty, fastening on their quivers and bearing their bows and swords, swiftly set out with Sita.