Having slain Marica, that titan able to change his shape at will who wandered about in the form of a deer, Rama took his way back to the hermitage with all speed, eager to behold Maithili and, as he hastened on, jackals began to howl mournfully behind him. Hearing those dismal sounds, causing him to tremble, Rama, seized with alarm, reflected: “Is Vaidehi safe and well or has she become a prey to the titans? The cry raised by Marica in the guise of a deer, imitating my voice, if heard by Lakshmana, may cause him to leave Sita in order to come to mine aid! It may be that the titans have resolved to slay Sita and for this reason Marica, in the form of a gazelle, lured me away! Having brought me a great distance, that titan fell a victim to my shafts and feigning my voice, cried out: ‘O Lakshmana, I am slain!’ Is all well with them, deprived of my presence in the forest? On account of Janasthana, I have rendered myself hateful to the titans, and many and dreadful are the portents I now see around me.”

Reflecting thus on hearing the jackals’ cries, Rama hurriedly made his way towards the hermitage, pondering on the means adopted by the titan in assuming the form of a deer to lure him far away from his dear ones.

Directing his steps towards Janasthana, his heart filled with apprehension, he observed the birds and beasts passing to his left, emitting fearful cries, and witnessing these dreadful signs Raghava beheld Lakshmana approaching, pale of mien. Already a prey to anxiety, Rama became even more distressed on seeing his brother thus cast down.

Observing that he had left Sita alone in the solitary wood frequented by titans, taking Lakshmana by the left hand, he spoke to him in a gentle voice, in sad and reproachful tones, saying:—

“Ah! Lakshmana, you have done wrong to come hither, leaving Sita unprotected. O My Friend, how can this prove auspicious? Assuredly the daughter of Janaka has been slain or even devoured by the titans who range the woods! Since so many evil portents have appeared to me, O Lakshmana, I question whether we shall find Sita, the daughter of Janaka, alive, O Lion among Men! Since this multitude of beasts and jackals are emitting fearful cries and the birds also, as they fly towards the south, I fear that all is not well with that king’s daughter, O Hero of great prowess!

“That titan, wearing the form of a deer, deceived me and drew me far from the hermitage. Having slain him with difficulty, at the point of death, he revealed himself to me in his true form. My heart is heavy and bereft of all delight, and my left eye throbs. Undoubtedly, O Lakshmana, Sita is no longer there and has either been carried away or is dead or lost in the forest.”