Shri Parasurama having departed, Shri Rama delivered the bow and arrows as a trust to the god Varuna. Having offered salutations to Shri Vasishtha and the other sages he, seeing his father filled with apprehension, addressed him, saying: “Sire, Shri Parasurama has now gone, do you command thine army to proceed towards Ayodhya.”

King Dasaratha, hearing Rama’s words, embraced him and reflected that his son was born to him a second time. Then summoning his army to advance, he in a chariot, adorned with banners, to the fanfare of trumpets proclaiming victory, entered Ayodhya.

The streets of the city sprinkled with water and flowers, appeared beautiful, and the citizens rejoicing at the return of their sovereign, greeted him with shouts of welcome.

Met by the brahmins inhabiting the city, the king with his friends and relatives, followed by the princes and their brides, entered the royal palace which was white as snow.

There, the kindred of the king welcomed him with garlands and sandalwood. The Queens Kaushalya, Sumitra and Kaikeyi received the brides and conducted the fortunate Sita, the illustrious Urmila, and the two daughters of Kushadvaj [Kushadvaja] to their palace, with auspicious rites. Arrayed in sumptuous silken robes, and borne to the temple to worship the holy images, the brides then offered respectful salutations to their mother-in-laws, and others worthy of honour. Thereafter, each began to live with her lord in her own palace.

Shri Ramacandra with the other princes, possessing the knowledge of the use of weapons and the science of defence, passed the time with their friends in attendance on their aged sire.

After some time, King Dasaratha said to his son Bharata: “O my Son, your maternal uncle, who came for the purpose of taking you to his home, still tarries in the capital, therefore, go with him to see your grandfather.”

Prince Bharata and Prince Shatrughna prepared to start on their journey and took leave of their father and their highly compassionate brother Rama.

Bharata being gone, Shri Rama and Lakshmana ministered to the aged king as if he were a god and in his name performed charitable deeds among the people of the city.

Rama also ministered to his mother with deep affection, and served his Guru with single-minded devotion. His noble behaviour gratified the king, the brahmins, merchants and other castes; his sweet disposition and pious conduct charmed the people of the capital. Rama, wholly devoted to truth was renowned for his virtue, and endowed with every excellent quality like Swayambhu Brahma himself.

For a long time did Shri Rama enjoy a life of content with Sita. To him, she was dear beyond all things and he surrendered his whole heart to her. Love is enhanced by beauty, virtue and gentleness, and Sita possessed all these in an equal degree with Rama. Lovely as a goddess, Shri Sita was able to discern the thoughts of her lord before he expressed them. The beautiful Sita with Shri Ramacandra wholly satisfied, resembled Lakshmi, the consort of the incomparable Vishnu.

END OF BALA KANDA.