The righteous Queen Sumitra hearing the lament of Queen Kaushalya addressed her in reasonable words: “O Queen, why dost you weep in abject fashion, for your son, the chief of men, endowed with every virtue? O Noble Lady, Shri Rama has renounced the throne and entered the forest to render his father illustrious, as the votary of truth. Shri Rama, honouring his father, has conducted himself as the best of men and secured the future glory of his sire. There is no cause for grief, since Rama is treading the path of dharma, neither is there cause to grieve for Lakshmana, ever compassionate to all, sinless, serving Rama and in every way worthy of the highest good. The tender-limbed Janaki, too, is following your virtuous son. O Queen, the exile of Rama is no cause for sorrow since he is the protector of all beings and the follower of virtue. O Queen, the banner of his good name waves over the three worlds. Consider the purity of Rama; even the sun dares not cause him suffering by its rays. In his presence, the hot winds of the forest in summer will grow cool and like the spring breeze bring him refreshment! When asleep in the forest at night, the moon, like a father, will succour him with its cool beams. That Ramacandra, to whom the Brahmarishi Vishvamitra gave celestial weapons on the death of his son Shambara, that valorous son, that lion among men, depending on the strength of his arms will dwell in the forest as fearlessly as in his own palace. That hero whose arrows destroy his foes, is certain to be succoured by the earth. That Rama, endowed with great prowess, power and courage, will soon return on the termination of his exile, to claim the kingdom. O Lady, Shri Rama, who illumines the sun which gives light to the whole world, who gives splendour to the fire, who is the supreme ruler of rulers, who is the fame of fame and the essence of forgiveness, who is the chief of beings; wherever he dwells, in the forest or the city, all is one to him. Shri Rama, this great hero, will speedily regain his kingdom, together with Sita, the earth and every prosperity. Shri Rama for whom, when departing for the forest, the people of Ayodhya filled with grief, shed tears, will soon regain the kingdom. Nought is difficult to obtain in the world by him, who, though invincible, entered the forest, dressed like an ascetic, followed by Sita, who is Lakshmi in another form.

“What should be difficult for him, who, armed with bow and sword, is preceded on his way by Lakshmana? O Lady, abandon grief and infatuation, assuredly you will behold Shri Rama returning from his exile. O You who art irreproachable, O Kalyani, O Auspicious One, you will behold your son like the rising moon, placing his head at your feet. You will shed tears of joy, seeing your son installed on the throne and in possession of the king’s treasury. O Lady, neither grieve nor let your mind be troubled, I see nought that is inauspicious in respect of Rama. Soon you shalt behold your son with Sita and Lakshmana. O Sinless Queen, it becomes you to encourage others, therefore, why dost you now cause your heart distress? O Devi, do not grieve, there is none in the world more virtuous than Rama. Seeing Rama returning from the forest with his friends, making obeisance to you, then will you shed tears of joy, like the clouds in the rainy season. In brief, I tell you, your son Shri Rama, returning to the capital, will press your feet to him with his tender hands. Seeing your son bowing to your feet you will cover him with tears as the clouds cover the mountains with rain.”

Thus did the beautiful Sumitra, ever persuasive and benevolent to all, offer words of consolation to the Queen Kaushalya and having spoken, became silent. The chief queen, the mother of Shri Rama, hearing the words of Queen Sumitra, found peace and forgot her grief which resembled the rain of the autumn clouds that swiftly disappears.