Sumantra said: “O King, when Shri’Rama entered the forest, I returned and the weary horses halting, stood still, showing signs of distress. Offering obeisance to the two princes, I mounted the chariot and restraining my grief, went forward, remaining a few days with Guha, in the hope that Shri Rama might call me again and take me with him.

“O King, turning homewards, I beheld the very trees filled with distress, their tender shoots, buds and flowers being withered! The water in the pools and rivers was slowly ebbing away, the leaves in the woods were falling and the beasts were motionless, the restless elephants no longer wandered here and there. Afflicted by Rama’s separation, the forest had become silent. O King, the waters in the ponds had grown turbid and the lotuses had submerged themselves, being unable to bear the severance from Rama. The fishes and water fowl had deserted their accustomed haunts and the aquatic plants and those that grew on land no longer gave forth their fragrant scents, while their fruits were devoid of taste. Gardens were bereft of beauty and birds sat motionless in the woods.

“Entering Ayodhya, none appeared to be happy and the citizens beholding the royal chariot without Rama were perpetually sighing. O Lord, seeing, from a distance, the chariot returning without Rama, all were plunged in grief. The women of the city, from their windows, balconies and roofs, seeing the chariot without Rama, broke into lamentation. With tears falling from their unpainted eyes, full of distress, they withdrew their gaze from all. To-day, I am unable to distinguish friend or foe owing to grief. All men together with elephants and horses, join in the suffering and mourning, all are afflicted in Rama’s separation 1 The city of Ayodhya, neglected and wretched, resembles Queen Kaushalya bereft of her son!”

Hearing these words, the king became agitated and in trembling accents addressed the charioteer: “O Sumantra, deeply penitent am I, that without deliberating with my able counsellors and elders, I granted the boons to the evil-minded Kaikeyi, under the sway of Manthara. This unpremeditated act was performed by me, inspired by my desire for Kaikeyi, without consultation with my friends and ministers. O Sumantra, this great calamity is the result of fate and will destroy the House of Ikshvaku. O Charioteer 1 If I have ever done any good to you, then take me to Shri Ramacandra soon; my life is fast ebbing from my body, or do you go to the forest and cause Rama to return, if he be still obedient to me. If that Mighty One be gone far from here, then take me in the chariot and drive there speedily; I desire to look on him but once more. Where is Rama, the elder brother of Lakshmana, whose teeth resemble the water lilies and who is a mighty warrior? If I am to live, I must see that virtuous one. If I do not behold Rama with reddened eyes, wearing beautiful earrings, set with jewels, I shall assuredly perish. O! What can exceed my pain, that, at the moment of death, I am unable to see Rama, the hero of the House of Ikshvaku? O Rama, O Lakshmana, O Patient Sita, you do not know that I am dying in bitter anguish.”

The king, his mind drowned in the sea of sorrow, cried: “O Kaushalya, that ocean of misery caused by Rama’s separation is fathomless, severance from Sita are its shores, deep sighs are the whirlpools rendered turbid by my tears, the stretching of the arms are its restless motion, lamentations are the sound of its thunder, dishevelled hair are the weeds, the words of Manthara are the crocodiles and Kaikeyi is the fire in its depths, the unscaleable cliffs are the boons which sent Rama to the forest. Without Rama, I am sinking in this bottomless sea, living, I am unable to cross over it. I desire to see Rama and Lakshmana this day, but alas 1 I am unable to obtain my desire, as a result of some great sin formerly committed by me.”

Thus complaining, the king fell senseless on the couch. The monarch, bewailing the absence of Rama, swooned away. Hearing the king’s words, the mother of Rama, Queen Kaushalya, was seized with fear.