The queen addressed the great sovereign, Dasaratha, who, overcome with desire, was pierced by the shafts of Kamadeva, and said: Neither am I sick nor has any offered me insult. I harbour a certain ambition which you can’st fulfil. If you are willing to accomplish this, then give me your solemn promise and I will make known its purport to you.”

The resplendent monarch, agitated by desire, raising the head of the queen from the ground took her in his arms and answered smilingly: “O Fortunate One, dost you not know that none is dearer to me than you, saving that lion among men, Shri Ramacandra. I swear by the invincible Rama, who is even dearer to me than you, that I will fulfil your ambition. O Kaikeyi, I swear by Rama, without seeing whom I cannot live one hour, that I will execute your desire. O Dear One, by my oath I have demonstrated to you the intensity of my love, now tell me what you desirest. Knowing the great love I bear for you, have no fear; by my meritorious deeds I declare to you, I will grant you what you asks.”

Following the instructions of Manthara, knowing the fulfilment of her ambition to be at hand and concerned with the advancement of Bharata, Kaikeyi spoke harshly. Satisfied with the attitude of the king, she, resembling the dreadful god of death, addressed him: “O Great King, formerly you didst promise me two boons to which the thirty-three gods were witness. O King, moon, sun, ether, the planets, day and night, the cardinal points, the universe and those who inhabit it, the earth, the gandharvas, the asuras, the spirits and other beings are witness to that promise given to me by you. O You Gods, listen with attention to the boons which the king, a lover of truth, highly resplendent and acquainted with the law of duty, grants me.”

The Queen Kaikeyi, praising the king, who was overcome by desire and ready to grant any boon, said: “O King, recollect how in the war between the gods and asuras, you didst fall wounded like one dead, and I rescued you by applying the appropriate means? On your recovery, you didst promise me two boons. O Truthful Monarch, I now earnestly desire these two boons which are in your power to grant. Should you, despite your promises given, not fulfil these desires, then I will relinquish my life, dishonoured by you.”

The queen, holding the king’s mind subject by her sweet words, resembled a hunter who, intending to slay a deer, lays a snare for it. Then addressing the king infatuated with passion and willing to grant any boon, she said:—

“O Deva, hear me, I now claim these two boons. Employing the preparations made for Rama’s installation, let my son Bharata be proclaimed regent, this is the first boon. The second pledge granted me on the battlefield is now also due to be fulfilled. Let Ramacandra be exiled to the forest for fourteen years, wearing a dress of bark, with matted locks like a hermit, while my son, Prince Bharata, rules without hindrance. This is my earnest desire. Let me, this day, behold the exile of Rama. O King, Protector of Truth, preserve your integrity and the traditions of your birth. The rishis declare that the observance of truth is the most excellent means of attaining heaven.”