Hearing the words of King Dasaratha inspired by solicitude for his son, the great sage replied in displeasure:—

“O King, recollect that you are born in the house of Raghu, how can’st you presume to break your promise? This action is unworthy of your royal line and is also improper. If this be your determined desire, I will take my leave, do you live at ease amidst your relatives and friends, O Violater of your Word!”

At the wrath of the august sage, the whole earth shook and the gods began to tremble. Seeing the whole world shaken with terror, the wise and patient muni Shri Vasishtha intervened, and thus addressed the king:—

“O King, you are born in the family of Ikshvaku and art righteousness personified! Blessed by fortune, filled with patience and endurance, you have cherished great vows and should’st not, therefore, abandon dharma. The three worlds know you as virtuous, it is your duty to maintain integrity and not to act in contradiction to it. O Chief of Men, if one making a promise does not honour it, he loses the merit of his good deeds. It is, therefore, for you to be faithful to your word and let Rama accompany this sage. Though Shri Ramacandra is inexperienced in warfare, yet the asuras will not be able to overcome him. Furthermore, he is under the protection of Shri Vishvamitra and no harm can come to him. How can one steal the nectar that is surrounded by fire? The holy Vish-wamitra is virtue itself, his powers are unsurpassed, and there is none living equal to him in wisdom and asceticism. In the whole world of men and other beings, none excels him in the use of weapons and none has fathomed the depth of his nature. Neither the celestials, nor the sages, nor the asuras, nor any other beings know the full glory of this sage. The god Krishasawa and his highly virtuous sons gave every variety of weapon to Vishvamitra when he was king. The two daughters of Daksha, Jaya and Suprabha invented thousands of resplendent weapons. Shri Vishvamitra is not one, but many in one form; he is illustrious, mighty and able to defeat any in battle. Jaya produced five hundred weapons supremely potent and capable of destroying a host of asuras. Suprabha also created five hundred weapons of war which no foe in the world could withstand. Shri Vishvamitra is an adept in the use of all these arms, O King, he is also able to create many new weapons and there is nothing in the three divisions of time which is not known to him. Do not hesitate to send your son Rama with this mighty and courageous sage, Shri Vishvamitra, and do not entertain any fears for his safety. The Sage Vishvamitra is well able to destroy the demons, but asks for the services of your son for his own good.”

The Guru Vasishtha having thus exhorted the monarch, the king cheerfully acquiesced to Shri Ramacandra accompanying the sage.