The slayer of his foes, Shri Ramacandra, hearing the words of Kaikeyi, keen as the pangs of death, was in no way moved by them, and answered: “Be it so! To honour the promise made by the king, I will leave for the forest immediately, with matted locks, attired in raiment made of bark, but I desire to know why the illustrious sovereign does not address me? O Devi, fear not, I vow, in your presence that I shall dwell in the forest, dressed in bark with matted locks; rejoice, therefore! Whatever command the benevolent monarch, ever mindful of my welfare, shall lay upon me, I will gladly execute to please him. There is nothing I would not do for him without hesitation, but one painful thought still lingers in my mind. Why does the king not speak to me himself of Bharata’s enthronement? O Mother, by thine order, I am willing to surrender to my brother Bharata, not only the kingdom, but also Sita, together with every object of desire, my wealth and my life. How much more would I do for my father, that he may preserve the vow of truth and serve your purpose. Render this matter clear to the king. How is it that I behold my father with bowed head, shedding tears? Let messengers on swift horses summon Prince Bharata immediately from his uncle’s house, while I, without considering the merit or demerit of my sire’s injunctions, enter the Dandaka forest for fourteen years.”

Queen Kaikeyi highly pleased by the words uttered by Shri Ramacandra and assured of his exile, urged him to depart, saying: “So be it; messengers on swift footed horses will summon Bharata immediately from his uncle’s home. O Rama, being ready to enter the forest, do not delay: depart, therefore, with all speed. Overcome with shame, the king dare not ask you to depart, but do you disregard this. O Ramacandra, the king will neither bathe nor partake of food till you have entered upon thine exile.”

The king, hearing the words of Kaikeyi, cried “Woe”, “Woe”, and, stricken with grief, fell senseless on the golden couch. Raising up the king, Shri Ramacandra, urged on by the words of Kaikeyi as a horse under the lash, prepared to enter the forest in all haste. His heart unmoved by the queen’s cruel words, he replied: “O Devi, I did not desire the kingdom to acquire wealth and power, but becoming regent, I wished to preserve dharma. Know me, like the sages, to be a protector of dharma. If I can render any service to my father at the cost of my life, it is as if already accomplished. There is no greater good in this world than service to one’s sire by thought, word and deed. On this command, not issued by the king but by you, I will dwell for fourteen years in the uninhabited forest. O Sati, you have been my mother and yet art unacquainted with my nature. If you had’st known me, no need would have arisen to consult my father on so insignificant a matter. Now I go to take leave of my mother, Queen Kaushalya, and offer consolation to my Sita. Let Bharata rule the kingdom according to dharma and serve our royal father faithfully. This is a son’s abiding duty.”

Hearing the words of Shri Ramacandra, the king, speechless and overcome with grief, wept aloud, shedding bitter tears. The most illustrious Rama made obeisance to his father lying pitifully there and, then bowing to the feet of Kaikeyi, left the apartment. Having circumambulated the King and Queen Kaikeyi with extreme reverence, Shri Ramacandra came forth from the inner chamber and beheld his friends standing at the door. Shri Lakshmana full of wrath, his eyes suffused with tears, followed Rama.

Shri Rama circumambulated the sacred articles prepared for the installation ceremony in great reverence, and prayed that they should be dedicated to the installation of Prince Bharata. Then turning from them, without a backward glance he slowly withdrew.

The abandoning of the ceremony failed to impair the serenity of Shri Ramacandra, the splendour of his countenance remained unchanged as the moon suffers no diminution of its beauty in the waning period. On renouncing the kingdom and departing for exile, Shri Ramacandra resembled a great yogi and none observed any change of mood in him.

Relinquishing the royal canopy, the beautiful camara and bidding a respectful and affectionate farewell to his friends and the people’s delegates and guests, remembering the sorrow occasioned to them, and restraining his senses, the prince went to the apartments of his mother, to break the distressing tidings to her. Those about him found no change in him, neither in the adornments of his body, donned in preparation for the royal ceremony, nor in the cheerfulness of his countenance. Such was the truthful Ramacandra. As the autumnal moon does not lose its splendour, so the cheerfulness of the mighty-armed Rama did not diminish. Addressing those standing near with sweetness and respect, he approached his mother Kaushalya.

The most valorous Prince Lakshmana, the sharer of his brother’s joys and griefs, followed him. Aware of the great distress that would arise in the hearts of his friends, Shri Rama for his mother’s sake entered the palace in a serene and cheerful mood.