Shri Vasishtha having taken his departure, Shri Ramacandra and the large-eyed Sita purified themselves, and mentally adored the Lord Narayana. Offering salutations to the vessel containing the sacrificial oblation and to propitiate Narayana, Shri Rama poured clarified butter into the sacred fire. Thereafter partaking of the remainder of the offering and praying for what was auspicious, seated on the kusha grass, he meditated on Shri Narayana. Observing silence with purified minds, the prince and princess slept in the temple. Three hours before the dawn, they rose and caused their servants to clean and decorate the palace. Then, after listening to the recitation of the dynastic ballads causing them great delight, they performed their morning devotions and silently repeated the Gayatri. As the sun rose, clad in silken garments, they saluted Shri Narayana abiding in the golden orb and then instructed the learned brahmins to recite the Peace Chant and other prayers.

The deep and melodious sound of the Peace Chant, recited by the brahmins, mingling with the beat of drums, filled the capital of Ayodhya. The inhabitants of the city, knowing that Rama and Sita were observing a fast and offering devotion to the Lord, were filled with joy.

On the dawning of day, the citizens brought banyan trees, setting them up as pillars to adorn the city for the coming coronation. The high temples resembling the Himalayan peaks, the stately houses, the highways, the crescents and streets, the shops filled with merchandise, the mansions where members of the royal family dwelt, the public assembly halls and the tall trees were all hung with flags of different colours which fluttered in the breeze. Here and there, companies of actors and dancers gave pleasure to the people by singing sweetly and playing melodiously on their instruments. In the market, in the houses, at home and abroad, all spoke only of the coming proclamation of Shri Rama as ruler. Children playing in front of their homes also chattered about this matter.

In honour of the occasion, the roads were strewn with flowers, and rendered fragrant with incense and pleasant odours; lamps were placed here and there lest the royal procession should pass through at night.

Having decorated the city, the inhabitants awaiting the proclamation, came together in public assemblies or stood on raised tribunes. Praising King Dasaratha, they said: “That mighty King Dasaratha of the dynasty of Ikswaku is indeed a pious man. Realising he has grown old, he, himself, is installing Rama as ruler. How gracious is our king that he is placing us under the rule of Shri Ramacandra. May the Lord long protect the prince as our ruler. Shri Rama is simple, highly learned, devoted to righteousness and affectionate to his brothers. Virtuous and wise, Shri Rama loves us as his own brethren. May the righteous and sinless King Dasaratha live long, by whose grace, we see Rama enthroned to-day.”

Hearing the praises of King Dasaratha by the people, those living far distant were attracted to the holy ceremony and flocked to see the royal procession, filling the city of Ayodha Puri.

On the day of the full moon, the tumult of the multitude was like the roar of the ocean. People coming from far and near to Ayodhya which resembled the city of Amaravati, enhanced the beauty of the capital as aquatic creatures add to the beauty of the sea.