King Janaka having uttered these words, Mahamuni Vishvamitra, as desired by Shri Vasishtha, said to him:—

“O King, wonderful indeed are the two Houses of Ikshvaku and Videha, their glory is limitless, verily they have no equal. Shri Rama and Sita are in perfect accord one with the other, as also Lakshmana and Urmila, each equals the other in grace and heritage. O Virtuous King, I have something further to say, hear me. Your younger brother, King Kushadvaja, unexcelled in virtue, has two daughters of incomparable beauty, these two I request for the sagacious Bharata and the pious Shatrughna. The four sons of King Dasaratha are youthful, handsome, resembling the gods, equal to the (four) guardians of the world. O Great King, bestow these two damsels on the younger sons of King Dasaratha. You are unequalled in virtue and the House of Ikswaku is without a peer.”

Hearing the magnanimous words of Shri Vishvamitra echoed by Shri Vasishtha, King Janaka with joined palms humbly addressed the two august sages:—

“O Holy Ones, I am proud that you have approved the alliance of my House with the House of Ikshvaku. Your commands shall be accomplished. The daughters of King Kushadvaja shall be given to the Princes Bharata and Shatrughna in marriage. Let the four great sons of King Dasaratha be united with the four princesses on the same day. O Divine Sage, to-morrow the constellation Phalguni presided over by the deity Bhag [one of the Adityas q.v.,] is in the ascendant. The wise consider this season as auspicious for the nuptials.”

Shri Vasishtha answering “Be it so”, King Janaka, in great humility, addressed the holy sages, saying: “O Spiritual Kings, it is by your favour that I am able to offer my daughters in marriage. Regard me as your servant. You are worthy of these seats prepared for you. Let my kingdom now belong to the King Dasaratha and my affections extend to the kingdom of Ayodhya. I have spoken truth. O Holy Ones, do what is considered necessary.”

King Dasaratha hearing with attention the words uttered by King Janaka was pleased and replied, saying: “O Brothers, possessing innumerable excellent qualities, you have honoured the holy rishis and kings with abundant hospitality. May you be blessed I May happiness be yours! With your leave I shall now withdraw to my own apartments to inaugurate the preliminary rites.”

Having taken leave of the King of Mithila, Shri Dasaratha, preceded by the holy sage, went away.

The following day, having fulfilled the traditional rites, King Dasaratha gave away innumerable cows in charity. On behalf of each of his sons, he bestowed on the brahmins thousands of cows whose horns were covered with gold, yielding rich milk, together with their calves. With every cow the king gave away a metal milking vessel. On that day, four hundred thousand cows were given away by him. That mighty king holding his sons supremely dear, gave incalculable wealth in their name. King Dasaratha, performing these deeds of charity, surrounded by his sons, resembled Brahma attended by the Regents of the world.