Hearing the words of Shri Vishvamitra, Shri Rama of limitless power and influence uttered the following auspicious words:—

“O Great Sage, it is said that the yakshinis have little power, then how is it that Taraka has come to possess the strength of a thousand elephants?”

The mahatma listened to Rama’s words and said: “O Prince, I will relate the story to you. This female demon has acquired her great strength by virtue of a boon which she received. In the past, a powerful yaksha by the name of Suketu, who was virtuous but childless, performed many yogic practices which pleased Shri Brahma, who promised him a daughter by name Taraka, and conferred on her the strength of a thousand elephants. But the most illustrious Brahma did not grant a son to that yaksha. When the daughter grew up and possessed both the charm of youth and great beauty, her father gave her in marriage to Sunda, the son of Jambha. After some time, the yakshini gave birth to a son. His name was Marica and he was very powerful; though born of yaksha parentage he became a rakshasa through a curse. O Rama, when the Sage Agastya condemned Sunda to death by cursing him, then Taraka and her son wished to devour the sage. Seeing her running towards him, the blessed Sage Agastya cursed Marica and said ‘Become a demon’. He also cursed that wicked woman so that she became a cannibal with a hideous countenance. Shri Agastya said: * May your beauty vanish and mayest you become a terrible rakshasi.’ Then Taraka, transported with anger under this curse, began to destroy this sacred land because it was here that the Sage Agastya performed his yogic practices.

“O Rama, you must slay this wicked and impious demon Taraka, who ravages the land. For the good of die brahmins and the king, O Raghava, accomplish this; do not hesitate to destroy this vile yakshini. It is the duty of a warrior to protect those of the four castes. A prince must not eschew deeds that are painful and difficult, for the preservation of his people. It is according to the law of eternal dharma, O Rama, that even deeds that appear ruthless, are permitted to those appointed to protect their subjects. O Raghava, Taraka is wholly evil, and therefore must be destroyed. It is said that in the past Manthara, a daughter of King Virocana, was slain by Indra because she was the cause of the destruction of others. The blessed Lord Vishnu Himself slew the wife of the Sage Bhrigu, devoted to her husband, and the mother of Shukra because she was intent on killing Indra. Many other great-souled princes of old also condemned wicked women to death. Therefore, it is for you to fulfil your duty and slay this yakshini without delay.”