Having bathed in the Godaveri river, Rama, Sita and Lakshmana left its banks and returned to the hermitage. On reaching their retreat, Raghava with Lakshmana performed their morning devotions and entered the leaf-thatched hut. In the hut, that long-armed hero with Sita at his side dwelt happily, honoured by the great Rishis, and shone like the moon accompanied by the Citra star.

One day, while Rama was reciting the traditional texts, a female demon chanced to pass that way, by name Shurpanakha who was the sister of Ravana.

Approaching Rama, she observed that he resembled a God, with his radiant countenance, his long arms, his large eyes like unto lotus petals, his majestic gait resembling an elephant’s, matted locks crowning his head; youthful, full of valour, bearing the marks of royalty, his colour that of the blue lotus and alluring as the God of Love himself.

Beholding that hero, the equal of Indra, the Rakshasi was overwhelmed with desire. Rama was handsome, she hideous; his waist was slender, hers thick and heavy; he had large eyes, hers squinted; his locks were beautiful, hers were red; his whole appearance was pleasing, hers repellent. Rama’s voice was sonorous, hers strident; he was fair and youthful, she old and haggard; he was amiable, she sullen; he was self-controlled, she unruly; he was captivating, she odious.

Consumed with passion, the Rakshasi said to Rama:—

“With your matted locks and ascetic guise, bearing bow and arrows, why hast you, accompanied by your consort, come to these woods, which are frequented by demons? What is the purpose of your journey?”

Hearing the words of the Rakshasi, Shurpanakha, that hero, the Scourge of his Foes, with perfect candour began to relate all.

He said:—“There was a king named Dasaratha, who was as powerful as a God. I am his eldest son, known among men as Rama; this is my younger brother, Lakshmana, my faithful companion, and this, my consort, the illustrious Sita, daughter of the King of Videha.

“Bound by the will of my sire and in order to carry out my duty, I have come to dwell in the forest.

“But now I wish to know who your father is, who you are, and what your race? To judge by your charms, you are a Rakshasi 1 Tell me truly, what has brought you hither?”

Hearing the words of Rama, the Rakshasi, tormented by the pangs of love, answered:—

“Hear O Rama and I will tell you the truth! I am Shurpanakha, a Rakshasi, who can change her form at will. I wander about in the forest, striking terror in the hearts of all beings. My brothers are Ravana, of whom you have doubtless heard, and the powerful and somnolent Kumbha-karna, the virtuous Bibishana a stranger to our practices, and two others famed for their martial qualities, Khara and Dushana.

“I, who am more powerful than they, having seen you, O Rama, wish to unite myself with you, O Lord, O First of Men I

“I am endowed with power and able to range at will by thought alone; therefore do you become my master. What is Sita to you?

“Deformed, without beauty, she is not worthy of you, whereas I should prove a well-matched partner, my beauty equal to thine own; do you look on me as your consort. This unsightly, grim-visaged human female, of lean abdomen, will be devoured by me this day in your presence, together with that brother of thine.

“You and I shall wander on the summit of the mountains and through the forests together, exploring the whole region of Dandaka, according to your whim.”

Speaking thus, the Rakshasi threw impassioned glances at Rama, who, smiling, made the following astute reply.