Having entered the hermitage, Lakshmana, the younger brother of Raghava, approached a disciple of Agastya and said to him:—

“The eldest son of King Dasaratha, the illustrious Rama, has come with his consort, Sita, to pay homage to the sage. I am his younger brother, obedient and devoted to him and his humble servant; perchance you have heard of us?

“We have penetrated into this dangerous forest at the command of our royal sire. We three desire to see the blessed One, do you make it known to him.”

Hearing Lakshmana’s words, the disciple said:—“So be it!” and went to inform Agastya at the place where the sacred fire burned. With joined palms approaching that Foremost of Munis whose austerities had rendered him invincible, he conveyed the news of Rama’s arrival to him.

In conformity with Lakshmana’s words, the cherished disciple of Agastya said:—“The two sons of King Dasaratha, Rama and Lakshmana, have come to the hermitage with Sita. These two warriors, Conquerors of their Foes, have come to look on you and to offer their services; be gracious enough to instruct me in what should now be done!”

Having heard from his disciple that Rama, followed by Lakshmana and the auspicious Vaidehi, were waiting, Agastya answered:—“How fortunate that after so long a time Rama has come to see me to-day. It was ever the desire of my heart to behold that great prince. Bid Rama welcome and ask him to enter together with his consort and Lakshmana who accompanies him; let them be brought into my presence; why has this not already been done?”

Thus addressed by that mighty muni, learned in the spiritual tradition, the disciple saluted him with joined palms and said: “Be it so!” Thereafter, issuing from the hermitage, he approached Lakshmana and addressed him, saying:—“Which of you is Rama? Let him enter and approach the sage.”

Thereupon Lakshmana, moving nearer to the gateway of the hermitage, pointed out Rama and Sita, the daughter of Janaka, to him, and the disciple humbly communicated Rishi Agastya’s message, conducting Rama into the hermitage.

Rama, accompanied by Sita and Lakshmana, entering the enclosure, which was filled with tame deer, observed the altars set up to Brahma and Agni and also the sacred places dedicated to Vishnu, Mahendra, Vivasvat, Soma, Bhaga, Kuvera, Dhatar and Vidhatar, Vayu, the God who holds the Thread in his hand, the magnanimous Varuna, Gayatri, the Vasus, the Nagas, Garuda, Karttikeya and Dharma.

Escorted by the disciple, he saw all these and suddenly beheld the great sage himself. Seeing him at the head of the ascetics, blazing with the lustre acquired by the practice of austerities, the valiant Rama said to Lakshmana, the increaser of his delight:—

“O Lakshmana, behold that blessed ascetic, Agastya, leaving the place of sacrifice; it is with pride that I bow before that treasury of renunciation.”

Speaking thus of Agastya, who shone like the sun, whilst he advanced towards him, the joy of the House of Raghu took hold of his feet and paid obeisance to him. Having saluted him, the virtuous Rama stood before him with joined palms, in company with Videha’s daughter and Saumitri.

Thereafter, embracing Kakutstha and honouring him with water and a seat, questioning him as to his welfare, the saint bade him welcome according to the tradition of the forest. Offering oblations into the fire, and presenting his guests with the arghya, that ascetic entertained them with food and placing himself at the side of Rama, who, conversant with his duty, sat with joined palms, said to him:—

“O Prince, an ascetic who fails to offer proper hospitality will feed on his own flesh in the other world, as does one who bears false witness. O Lord of the Universe, Observer of Your Duty, Warrior of the Great Car, who art worthy of all honour and respect, you are come at last and art my beloved guest.”

With these words, the Sage Agastya, as a symbol of homage, offered Rama fruits, roots, flowers, water and other things in great profusion, and said to him:—

“Here is a celestial and powerfill bow, encrusted with gold and diamonds, that belonged to Vishnu. O Tiger among Men, it is the creation of Vishvakarma.

“Here also is the Brahmadatta dart, which is infallible and resembles the sun; it is pre-eminent and was given to me by Mahendra; here also are these two inexhaustible quivers, filled with sharp arrows that blaze like torches and here a mighty silver scabbard and a sword decorated with gold.

“With this bow, O Rama, Vishnu slew the great asura in battle and formerly acquired inexpressible glory amongst the dwellers in the celestial regions.

“This bow, these two quivers, the dart and the sword, pledges of victory, do you accept, O Proud Warrior, and bear them as Vajradhara the thunderbolt.”

Thus speaking, the illustrious and fortunate Agastya gave to Rama the whole panoply of weapons belonging to the mighty Vishnu, and once more addressed him:—