The day having dawned, the broad-chested and illustrious Rama addressed the virtuous Prince Lakshmana. “Lo! the goddess Night has fled and the sun is about to rise. O listen how the blackbird is singing and the peacock’s cry is heard in the forest. Let us cross the swift-flowing Bhagirathi, which runs towards the sea.”

Shri Lakshmana, hearing Shri Rama’s command, standing before his brother, called Guha and Sumantra. Guha divining Shri Rama’s purpose, summoned his ministers and said to them: “Speedily bring a good boat, stout and strong, capable of taking Shri Rama across.”

The minister according to Guha’s instruction brought an excellent boat and said: “Sir, the boat is ready.” Then Guha, with joined palms, approaching Shri Rama thus addressed him: “O Lord, your boat is at hand, what further dost you require of me? O Lion among men, O Prince, O You observer of great vows, the boat capable of crossing the river flowing towards the sea, is here, please enter it.”

The glorious Prince Rama answered Guha saying: “You have supplied me with all I could desire, now place the baggage on the boat.” The princes donning their quivers, and bearing their bows, came to the place where the boat was waiting.

Then Sumantra approaching the righteous Rama with bowed head and joined palms, said: “What commands hast you for me, O Lord?” Touching Sumantra with his right hand, Shri Rama replied: “O Virtuous Sumantra, now return to the king and serve him with vigilance, I no longer need you. O Friend, leaving the chariot, I will enter the forest on foot.” Sumantra receiving the order to return, imagined himself already separated from Rama and full of grief exclaimed: “O Lord, none in the kingdom desires you to enter the forest with Sita and Lakshmana like a common man. When I behold you, compassionate and guileless, facing great adversity, I regard as vain, compassion, simplicity, the brahmacarya vow and the study of the Veda! O Prince, dwelling in the forest with Sita and Lakshmana will bring you renown equal to one who conquers the three worlds; but we, separated from you, O Rama, are doomed and will fall under die sway of the sinful Kaikeyi.”

The wise Sumantra, certain of Rama’s departure, filled with distress, wept long and bitterly. At length, restraining his tears he purified himself with water, and was then addressed by Rama who spoke to him in gentle accents, saying: “Among the ministers of the house of Ikshvaku, none is so kind a friend. Will you, therefore, act in such wise that the king be freed from grief? The Lord of the earth is aged, his mind confused and he is tormented with desire, therefore I ask you to minister unto him. Whatever the king commands, through affection for Queen Kaikeyi, do you perform. Kings rule to fulfil their desires. O Sumantra, act in such a way that the kirfg be not displeased, and that he may not sink under the weight of affliction.

When you dost approach him, who was hitherto a stranger to suffering, offer salutations on my behalf and say:

‘Having renounced Ayodhya and entered the forest, Shri Rama, Lakshmana and Sita suffer no distress; fourteen years having passed, you shalt soon see them return!’

“Deliver thus my message of affection again and again to the king, to my mother Kaushalya, the other queens and also Kaikeyi. Bowing to the feet of my mother Kaushalya, tell her that all is well with me and also with Sita and Lakshmana. Advise the king to send for Bharata speedily and when he is come, let him be installed as regent. Taking Prince Bharata in thine arms, appoint him king; you shalt thus be freed from the grief caused by this separation. Thereafter, let Bharata, on my behalf be instructed to treat our mothers with equal affection and with the same honour as is due to the king.

Let him look on Sumitra and my mother Kaushalya as his own mother Kaikeyi. Do you say:

‘If you accept the kingdom to please the king, your fame and happiness in both worlds are assured’.”

Having spoken thus, Shri Rama desired to dismiss Sumantra from his presence bearing the message, but the minister, deeply distressed, addressed him, saying: “O Ramacandra, forgive me if I utter words lacking in reverence, urged by my devotion for you, nor deem me to be a hypocrite. O Raghava, Ayodhya, by your departure, resembles one afflicted by the loss of a son, how shall I return there without you? Seeing the chariot without you, the people will be filled with distress, the heart of the city will be riven in twain. Though you have travelled far, yet in the hearts of the citizens of Ayodhya you are still present with them. Assuredly the people have neither partaken of food nor water in thine absence. At the time of your departure, O Prince, you wast acquainted with their grief, and didst witness their weeping and lamentation. On beholding the empty chariot, their sorrow will be increased a thousandfold. On returning to Ayodhya, with what words shall I address your mother? Shall I say ‘I have left your son at the home of your brother, do not grieve.’? How can I utter such a falsehood, yet how can I relate the truth to her? Those noble steeds that have drawn the chariot bearing you, Lakshmana and Sita, how shall they be driven without you? O Sinless Prince, I cannot return to Ayodhya without you, therefore let me remain with you in the forest. If in spite of my prayer, you still renouncest me, I will, with the chariot enter a blazing fire. O Prince, whatever beings seek to frustrate your life of devotion in the forest, I will repel with my chariot. Through you, I am enabled to drive the chariot, now be gracious enough to let me enter the forest with you. Accept me, therefore, as your protector and let me enter the forest, I ask you with exceeding love. O Hero, should these excellent steeds serve you in the forest, they will acquire a high spiritual state. O Prince, by whatever means I may serve you in the forest, I would esteem it more than residence in heaven or in Ayodhya. Without you, I am unable to return to the capital, as the sinful Indra was unable to enter Amaravati. It is my highest desire when your period of exile shall be over to convey you to the capital once more. O Rama, fourteen years with you will pass like a moment, while without you, they will seem like a thousand years. O Friend of those devoted to you, I have resolved to stay in the forest with the son of my lord. How can’st you abandon your devoted friend, who only seeks to do his duty?”

Thus repeatedly besought by the minister Sumantra, Shri Rama answered him saying: “O Lover of your Master, I know of your devotion to me, but hear the reasons which prompt me to send you hence to Ayodhya.

“Seeing you return to the capital, my mother Kaikeyi, convinced I have entered the forest will be satisfied and will no longer reproach the king, charging him with falsehood and unrighteousness. I desire that my mother Kaikeyi should enjoy the prosperous kingdom governed by her son Bharata, therefore, to please me, return to the capital and deliver the message with which I have entrusted you.”

Thus Rama, offering explanation to Sumantra then spoke words of reason and encouragement to Guha, saying: “O Guha, it is not proper for me to dwell in the forest in which my friends reside, therefore, constructing a hut of leaves and twigs elsewhere I will live as an ascetic. For the spiritual welfare of my father, I, Sita and Lakshmana, with matted hair following the ascetic discipline, will reside in the forest. Bring me, therefore, the milk of the Bhurja tree. Guha obeyed the instruction of the prince, whereupon Rama poured the viscous liquid on his own head and also on the head of Lakshmana! Thus Shri Rama, that Lion among men, and his brother Lakshmana appeared as ascetics and in their robes of bark with matted locks looked charming. Taking the vow of brahmacarya, the two brothers addressed Guha saying: “O Guha, do not neglect thine armies, your treasury, your forces of defence and your people. A kingdom is governed through diligence and exertion.”

Taking leave of Guha, Shri Rama with Sita and Lakshmana went quickly towards the Ganges. Seeing the boat near the bank of the swiftly flowing river and desirous of crossing over it, Rama said to Lakshmana: “O Lion among men, hold the boat firm and aid the gentle Sita to board it, then you, too, enter it.”

Acting on his brother’s command, Shri Lakshmana first assisted the daughter of the King of Mithila and then boarded the boat himself. Then the resplendent Rama followed, being the last to enter and Guha ordered his servants to row them over the sacred river.

Occupying his seat in the boat, Prince Rama began to recite the Vedic mantra for the safe conduct of all. Performing the Achmana ritual, he offered salutations to Shri Ganga and Lakshmana also made obeisance to the sacred stream. Shri Rama once more bade farewell to the charioteer, the army and Guha, and asked the helmsman to row to the other side. The boat moved swiftly to the sound of the oars.

Arriving in midstream, the delighted Sita, with joined palms, adored Shri Ganga, saying: “O Ganga, may this son of Dasaratha, obeying the commands of his father, be protected by you. May he, passing fourteen years in the forest, return again with Lakshmana and myself. Then, O Devi, O Blessed Ganga, returning with them, I will worship you. O Ganga, you are the fulfiller of pious desires. O You Tripartite Goddess, reaching to the abode of Brahma, and appearing in the mortal realm as the consort of the ocean king, O Beautiful One, I bow down to you and adore you. When, returning safely from the forest, Shri Rama occupies the throne, then I, desiring to gratify you, will give a hundred thousand cows, abundant grain and beautiful apparel to the brahmins in charity. Returning to Ayodhya, I will offer a sacrifice of a hundred jars of wine and rice to you. I will worship all the gods dwelling on your banks and all the sacred places such as Prayaga and Kashi. O Sinless One, grant that Rama and Lakshmana, free from sin, completing the term of their exile, return again to Ayodhya.”

Thus worshipping the Ganga, the Promoter of delight, they reached the further bank. Then Rama, chief of men, leaving the boat on the southern shore, proceeded to the forest with Lakshmana and Janaki, and addressed Shri Lakshmana, saying: “O Son of Sumitra, do you carefully protect Shri Sita in the lonely and also the frequented areas of the forest. We must guard her in this unknown and uninhabited place, therefore, O Lakshmana, do you go before and let Sita follow you, I will walk behind to safeguard you both, let us defend each other, O Prince. So far, Shri Sita has not made trial of her strength, but from to-day she must endure the hardships of a forest life. To-day, the daughter of King Janaka will enter the forest where no man dwells, nor are there fields or gardens there, but hard and arid ground with yawning chasms everywhere.”

Shri Lakshmana, thus instructed, went ahead with Sita following him, Shri Rama coming after.

Meantime, Sumantra, on the further bank, followed Raghava with his eyes, and overcome with grief, wept bitterly. Shri Rama, resplendent as the earth’s guardians, giver of boons, having crossed the river Ganga, came to the land of Batsya.

Thereafter, the two brothers hunted the deer and wild boar, and other beasts and growing hungry, fed on roots and berries, as ordained, resting at eventide beneath a tree.