Seeing the two brothers fallen into his arms as if into a snare, Kabandha said to them:—

“What ails you, O Foremost among Warriors? Since I am tormented with hunger, fate has destined you for my food and for this reason has deprived you of your wits.”

Hearing these words Lakshmana, though sore distressed, determined to display his valour and addressed Rama in words worthy of the occasion, saying:—

“We shall soon become the food of this vile demon, who with his vast and powerful arms subdues all beings; let us with our swords sever his arms with all speed, O Lord, or he will make an end of us. It is shameful for warriors to make away with those who cannot defend themselves like an animal deprived of its freedom that is led to sacrifice.”

These words infuriated the demon, who opened his terrible mouth wide, preparing to devour them, whereupon the two brothers, choosing a favourable moment, as if in sport cut off his two arms at the shoulders, Rama cutting the right and Lakshmana with a vigorous stroke of his sword, the left. Thereupon Kabandha, his vast arms severed, emitting loud shrieks which resounded through the earth and sky like thunder, fell upon the ground. Beholding his two arms severed and the blood flowing in streams, the unfortunate demon enquired of those two warriors in feeble accents:—“Who are you?”

Thus accosted, the supremely courageous Lakshmana began to extol the virtues of Kakutstha, saying:—

“This is Rama, the descendant of the House of Ikshvaku, known throughout the earth, and I am his younger brother, Lakshmana. Deprived of his kingdom by the Queen Kaikeyi, Raghava was exiled to the great forest, where he lived with his consort and myself. While this hero, mighty as a God, dwelt in that pastoral retreat, a titan bore away his consort, in search of whom we have come hither.

“And you, who art you, wandering in these woods emitting flames, your thighs sunk into your body?”

On hearing Lakshmana, Kabandha, calling Indra’s words to mind, answered joyfully:—

“Welcome to you, O Tigers among Men, beholding you is my salvation; for my good, you have cut off my arms. Do you hear, how, due to mine arrogance, I came to assume this monstrous shape. O Illustrious Ones, I shall relate all to you truthfully.”