The sweet-speaking Sita, worthy of Rama’s love, thus being instructed to remain in Ayodhya, though filled with affection, indignantly replied: “O Offspring of a great king, O Rama, how canst you speak in such wise? O Prince, your words evoke laughter. O Chief of Men, father, mother, son and daughter-in-law live according to their merit and dependent on it, but a wife enjoys the fortune of her husband since she is a part of himself. I am therefore entitled to share your father’s command and also go into exile.

“The happiness of a woman depends on her husband, neither father, mother, son, relative or companion avail her at death; in this world and in the other world, the husband alone is her all-in-all. If you to-day depart for the forest, I will precede you on foot, clearing the thorns and kusha grass from your path. O Hero, relinquishing anger and pride, take me with you without hesitation. There is no fault in me that merits my remaining here, without you. The joy experienced by lords of men whether dwelling in a palace or transported in an aerial chariot through the heavens or possessing the eightfold psychic powers, is far inferior to the joy of the wife in the service of her lord. My royal father has instructed me fully in the duties of a wife and, therefore, I have no need of further instruction in the matter. Assuredly I shall accompany you to the forest, uninhabited by men, filled with savage beasts, such as bears and bulls. O My Hero, I will dwell in the forest as happily as in the palace of my father, having no anxiety in the three worlds save the service of my spouse. O Hero, I will wander with you in the forest according to the ancient spiritual ordinance, free from desire for pleasure, traversing the honey-scented woodland. O Lord of my Life, since you canst protect and support innumerable people, canst you not more easily protect me? Without doubt to-day I shall enter the forest with you, O Fortunate Prince, none can break my resolve. I shall live happily on fruits and roots with you in the forest, causing you no anxiety. Under the protection of one as wise as you, O Lord, I desire to enjoy the beauty of lakes, mountains and rivers without hindrance. O Rama, I long with you to see the beautiful lakes where swans and kavandava birds play and charming lotuses bloom. There will I bathe with you, O My Lotus-eyed Lord, sporting there with you. Thus would I pass a thousand years with you, the happiness enjoyed in your company renders even the delights of heaven distasteful to me. O Prince, without you, heaven itself would not please me. I long to enter the forest with you where deer, monkeys and elephants roam. O Prince, serving your holy feet, I will pass the time there as happily as in my royal father’s house. Recognizing no other, in you my mind finds its highest delight; separated from you, I shall surely die. O Master, be gracious enough to take me with you, assuredly I shall not burden you.”

Shri Ramacandra hearing the humble and piteous words of Shri Sita, unwilling to let the princess accompany him, sought to dissuade her by describing the hardships of a forest life.