Provoked by Sita’s proud words, Ravana, scowling, answered her in fierce accents:—

“O Lady of Fair Complexion, may prosperity attend you! I am the brother of the Lord of Wealth, my name is Ravana. I am the mighty Dashagriva from whom, as all creatures before death, the Gods, Gandharvas, Pisacas, Patagas and Nagas flee in terror. I have subdued my blood-brother Kuvera, who for a certain reason I incited to combat and who, vanquished by me, fled in alarm from his sumptuous abode and sought refuge on Kailasha, the Lord of Mountains.

“By virtue of my prowess I robbed him of his marvellous chariot, Pushpaka, that moves according to one’s will, and in it I range the skies. Seeing my dread visage, the Gods with Indra at their head flee in terror, O Maithili. Wheresoever I roam, the wind blows temperately and the rays of the sun resemble the moon’s. Where I stay, the leaves of the trees become motionless and the rivers cease to flow.

“Beyond the sea stands my magnificent capital, Lanka, inhabited by powerful titans, equal to Indra’s citadel, Amaravati.

“That beautiful stronghold, encircled by dazzling battlements with golden ramparts and gates of emerald, is a city of dreams.

“Filled with elephants, horses and chariots, echoing to the sound of bugles, it is embellished by pleasant gardens planted with diverse trees, yielding fruit of every desirable taste. O Sita, OThou Daughter of a King, in that city you shall dwell with me, forgetting the lot of mortal women. There you shalt taste celestial delights! O Lady of exquisite countenance, think of Rama no more, who is but human and whose end is near. Placing his beloved son on the throne, King Dasaratha sent his heir of negligible prowess to the forest. What wouldst you with that Rama, deprived of his kingdom, living as an ascetic in solitude, O Large-eyed Beauty? I, the Lord of all the titans, have come to you in person, pierced by the shafts of the God of Love. It does not befit you to disregard me. O Timid Lady, if you dost pass me by, you will repent, like Urvashi, who thrust away Puraravas with her foot. Rama is but a mortal and not equal to even a finger of mine in combat. By good fortune I have come to you; do you therefore yield thyself to me, O Fair One.”

At these words, Vaidehi, her eyes flashing with anger, though alone, answered that Lord of the Titans boldly, saying:—

“Since you claimest to be the brother of the God, Kuvera, who is held in veneration by all the Celestials, how dost you dare to commit this infamous deed, O Ravana? Undoubtedly all the titans will meet with destruction, having so cruel, senseless and lustful a person as you as their sovereign. The ravisher of Indra’s consort, Saci, may survive, but he who bears away the wife of Rama will never live in peace. O Titan, it were possible for the one who deprives the Bearer of the Thunderbolt of his consort of unsurpassed beauty to live on earth, but he who insults me will never escape death, were he to drink the water of immortality!”