Having listened to this tale, Shri Rama addressed the Muni Vishvamitra, who resembled the fire in splendour, and said: “O Wise One, may prosperity constantly attend you! I desire to hear how my ancestor King Sagara performed the sacrifice.”

Shri Vishvamitra, highly gratified by Shri Rama’s eager enquiry, smilingly replied: “Listen, O Rama, to the history of the high-souled King Sagara. There is a country between the Himalayas and the Vindhya mountains, and it was there that King Sagara performed his sacrifice. That land is suitable for this purpose, O Great Prince.

“The great archer and warrior Amshuman was appointed the protector of the horse released for the sacrifice. A rakshasa in disguise, stole the horse and when it was being borne away, the priests approached the king, crying:

‘See, someone is carrying off the horse, kill the thief and restore it.’

The king called for his sixty thousand sons and said:

‘A wicked demon has stolen the sacrificial steed, in what direction has he borne it away? It has been consecrated by mantrams to avoid obstructions; seek the horse, my sons, and may success attend you. Scour the earth surrounded by the seas, and excavate the earth at my command, till the sacred horse is found. Having taken the initiation, I cannot leave this place. Go You, My Sons I I shall remain here with Amshuman and the brahmins.’

“O Rama, commanded by their father, those powerful princes joyfully started in search of the horse. O Great One 1 they ranged the world in vain and began to dig the ground with their nails which were as sharp as diamonds.

“O Prince of the House of Raghu, they used ploughs, spades and other implements to excavate the ground and the earth shook with the sound. While ploughing up the earth, many snakes, demons and powerful titans were slain and injured.

“O Raghava, those mighty princes pierced the earth to the depth of sixty thousand miles and reached the antipodes. Having pierced the earth with its mountains, they searched for the horse in Jambudvipa.

“The devas, gandharvas, asuras and nagas became agitated, and approached Shri Brahma; bowing before him with their minds afflicted and in great distress, they said:

‘O Blessed Lord, the sons of the Maharajah Sagara are digging up the whole earth and they have brought about the death of many great beings. Whosoever opposes them is slain with the words, “You are a thief, you have stolen the sacrificial horse”’.