Deprived of his virility, Indra grew melancholy, and addressing Agni and the other gods, said: “By obstructing the ascetic practices of the Mahatma Gautama, who sought to usurp my power, I have verily served the purpose of the gods. Evoking his wrath, by causing him to curse me and denounce Ahalya, I have robbed the rishi of his spiritual power, therefore, O Devas, O Divine Beings, help me now to recover my manhood.”

Then the gods with Agni at their head, approached the pittris, kavyavahanas and other beings and said to them: “Indra has been deprived of his virility; this ram of yours is in full possession of its powers, allow us to graft the testicles of the ram on to Indra, we can compensate the ram in this wise—from to-day, let those who desire to propitiate you, offer the sacrifice of a castrated ram and receive the reward of great merit at your hands.”

The pittris did as requested by Agni and grafted the testicles of the ram on to Indra. From that time, O Rama, they have accepted the sacrifice of a gelded ram.

This event proves the immeasurable power of the practices of the holy sage. Now let us enter his hermitage. O Rama, do you liberate the unfortunate Ahalya, so that she may once more resume her nymph-like form.”

Shri Rama accepted the command and entered the hermitage, preceded by the Sage Vishvamitra. There they beheld Ahalya, by virtue of her yogic practices. Unperceived by devas, asuras or men, it seemed as if Brahma had created her with his own hands as a great mistress of occult powers. Resembling the full moon veiled in mist or the reflection of the sun in water or a bright fire wreathed in smoke, by the curse of the Rishi Gautama she remained invisible and thus it was ordained she should remain till she beheld Shri Ramacandra and till that hour, none in the three worlds should look on her.

With the deepest reverence did Shri Rama and Lakshmana touch the feet of Ahalya and she, remembering the words of the Rishi Gautama fell down in devotion before them. Thereafter, she entertained them with due hospitality, as enjoined in the scriptures, while the two princes acknowledged the honour paid to them. At this moment a rain of flowers fell from the sky, scattered by the gods; heavenly musicians sang and celestial nymphs danced whilst all rejoiced and paid homage to Ahalya.

The illustrious Sage Gautama becoming aware of the matter through his divine powers, repaired to the hermitage and rejoiced to behold Ahalya restored to her former state. Re-united, they both worshipped the glorious Rama and then resumed their spiritual life together.

Shri Rama, having accepted the homage offered to him, departed thence for Mithila.