King Janaka, paying homage to the Sage Vasishtha, said: “O Maharishi, be peace with you, hear the account of the succession of our dynasty. At the time of bestowing a daughter in marriage, it is customary for the father to recite the pedigree of his race, be gracious enough to hear me, O Lord.

“In ancient times, renowned in the three worlds was the King Nimi, eminent in virtue, a lover of truth and foremost among kings of that era. Nimi begot Mithi whose son was the first Janaka and he begot Udavasu. His son was Nandivardhana and he begot Suketu. Suketu begot the righteous Devarata and the son of Devarata was the royal Sage Brihadratha. He begot the great hero Mahavirya whose son was Dhratiman and his son was the truthful Sudhriti. He begot Dhrishta-Ketu and his son was the royal Sage Haryashva. Haryashva begot Maru. Then followed Prasidhaka, Kirttiratha, Devamirha, Bibudha, Mahidhraka, Kirtivaja and Maharoma. Maharoma begot Svarnaroma and his son was Hrasvaroma. Hrasvaroma had two sons of whom I, myself, am the elder, and this is my younger brother Kushadvaja. My father, bequeathing the kingdom to me and charging me with the care of Kushadvaja, retired to the forest. My aged sire, having passed from this world, I began to rule according to dharma, supporting my brother with the utmost affection. After some time, the King Sudhanva besieged the capital of Mithila, thereafter he sent me offers of peace on condition I surrendered my daughter, Sita, and also the sacred bow of Shiva to him. O Brahmarishi, on rejecting his offer a battle ensued between us in which Sudhanva was slain. O Great Sage, King Sudhanva being dead, I gave the kingdom of Sankasya to my well-beloved brother Kushadvaja. This is my well-beloved brother. O Sages, we submit ourselves in love, to you.

“O Raghava, to Shri Ramacandra I give my daughter Sita, and Prince Lakshmana will receive the Princess Urmila. Sita, resembling a daughter of the gods, I bestow on Rama; verily with my whole heart do I yield these two daughters of mine to your sons. O King, now be pleased to inaugurate the traditional distribution of kine in charity. Perform the Nandi-Mukha ceremony so that the nuptials may be celebrated.

“To-day the Magda star is in die ascendant and in three days the Uttara Phalguni will have risen; the marriage should take place in that conjunction.

“For the purpose of ensuring their felicity, let Rama and Lakshmana now distribute cows, land, sesamum seed and other requisite offerings.”