Shri Rama again stressed the dangers of the forest and sought to persuade Sita not to accompany him; but Sita, with fixed resolve, trembling with fear yet urged by love and pride, spoke as in jest: “O Rama, if my father the Lord of Mithila, had known you as a man in form only, but a woman at heart, he would never have united me to you. Alas! that men in ignorance speak of Rama as resembling the sun in splendour, when in reality he is not so. O Rama, what makes you sad? Whence your fear that you, abandoning me who am devoted to you, should go to the forest? O Hero, know me to be to you what Savitri was to Satyavanta, the son of the valiant King Dyumatsena. O Sinless Prince, I have never looked on any, even in thought, but you, nor do I resemble those women dishonouring their family’s name who look on other men; therefore, let me go with you.

“O Rama, why dost you desire to surrender me to Bharata, I, who, long resident with you, your youthful spouse, am solely devoted to you? Whether living as an ascetic or hermit or residing in heaven, I will follow you. Journeying in the forest will not weary me; by following you, I shall experience the same delight as walking in the gardens or sporting with you in the woods. O Rama, in your company the thorny briars such as kusha, sarpat and shara will seem to me as soft as deer skin. The dust raised by the storm, covering my body, will be as sandalpaste to me. I shall share with you the couch of grass with the same delight as a bed of silken down. What ever leaves, roots or fruits you dost bring for me will be as sweet and satisfying as ambrosia. Enjoying with you, the fruits and flowers of every season, I shall not call to mind my mother, father and home. No anxiety will be caused to you by my presence in the forest, neither shall my sustenance be a burden to you. I tell you the forest will be heaven in your company, and without you even the palace will be hell to me. Be pleased, therefore, to let me go to the forest with you. I fear nought in the forest, but if you still refiiseth to take me with you, then will I end my life by poison; never will I dwell among strangers. O My Lord, without you nothing is left to me but death; abandoned by you, it were better to die. I cannot endure the grief of your separation even for an hour, how then shall I suffer it for fourteen years?”

Thus Sita, lamenting and embracing Shri Rama, wept aloud. From her eyes, like a she elephant wounded by poisoned arrows, long-restrained tears issued, as fire is kindled by the friction of wood. Crystal drops fell from her eyes as water slips from the petals of the lotus flowers. The face of the princess resembling the full moon, withered by the fire of intense grief, looked like a lotus withdrawn from water.

Shri Ramacandra, taking Sita, afflicted and fainting, in his arms, spoke to her in the following wise: “O Devi, I do not desire even to enter heaven if it causes you pain! Nought do I fear! Like Brahma, I am wholly fearless! Though able to protect you in every way, yet not fully knowing your mind, I declined to let you share my exile. Seeing you are destined to share my exile, I do not desire to abandon you, as a man of virtuous conduct determines not to sacrifice his good name. O Beautiful One, following the example of the good of yore, I shall act in the same manner; do you follow me as Suvarchala follows the sun. O Daughter of King Janaka, I am not entering the forest by my own desire, but to obey the injunctions of my father. O Devi, it is the duty of a son to obey his parents, I could not endure life if I failed to observe my father’s command. Fate is invisible, who can control it, but the parents and the spiritual preceptor are visible deities and their orders must be obeyed. What in the world is so sacred as the worship of that which grants dharma, prosperity and pleasure? By this worship, homage is paid to the three worlds. O Sita, observance of truth, charity and sacrifice accompanied by suitable offerings (dakshina) is of less avail in obtaining the spiritual realm than the service of parents and the Guru. Those who serve their parents and the spiritual preceptor obtain heaven, wealth, learning and progeny and nothing is impossible for them. Those who are devoted to their parents and their Guru obtain entrance to heaven and the regions of the devas, the gandharvas and Brahma. This is eternal righteousness—to obey the command of your parents, fixed in the practice of truth. O Sita, not knowing your mind, I advised you not to accompany me, but now seeing your fixed resolve I desire to take you with me. O Princess, whose eyes sparkle like wine, you are destined to be my companion, do you assist me in the performance of my duty. It is well that you didst desire to be with me in accordance with the custom of our forbears. O Sita, prepare to go into exile without delay; without you, even heaven does not please me. Bestow your jewels on the brahmins in charity and offer food to the poor; hasten, make no delay. Give to the brahmins, jewels, ornaments, rich apparel, whatever you possessest or is employed for my entertainment, all that is mine and thine, couches, coverlets, and vehicles give in charity to the brahmins and what remains distribute among the servants.”

Shri Sita, happy at the acquiescence of Prince Rama and knowing her departure to be fixed, began to distribute all her possessions. Free from anxiety, Sita bestowed on the pious brahmins her wealth and all her jewels.