The dweller in that dense forest, Guha, began to console the virtuous and affectionate prince, whose love for the pious Lakshmana and Shri Ramacandra was unwavering, and said: “O Lord, when the valiant Lakshmana, well armed, was keeping watch over the then sleeping Rama, I said to him, ‘O Friend, a soft couch is prepared for you, sleep thereon at ease, O Prince of Raghu, those dwelling in the forest are accustomed to hardship but you are worthy of comfort, we will keep guard over Shri Rama this night. O Prince, there is none in the world so dear to us as Rama. Be not anxious, we will keep watch over Shri Rama; do you rest. By the grace of Rama, I hope to acquire great renown and the limitless wealth of dharma in this world. Therefore, O Prince, I will protect my friend, Shri Rama who is reposing with Sita! My kinsmen will keep watch; nothing in the forest is unknown to me, who constantly traverse it; I could challenge a great army with success, should it venture to attack Shri Rama!”

“O Lord, the illustrious Lakshmana, established in virtue, answered me saying: ‘O Guha, when the virtuous Rama and Sita are resting on the naked earth, how should I occupy an easy couch? How can any of the comforts of life or life itself be mine if Shri Rama does not also enjoy them? O Guha, behold Shri Rama, capable of subduing the gods and demons, resting on a bed of grass. Through great austerity and penance was Shri Dasaratha blessed with a son, like unto himself. Assuredly, the king will not long survive the exile of Shri Rama, and the land will soon become widowed. The women will lament loudly and then grow silent. I fear lest my Father, Queen Kaushalya and my mother Sumitra will not survive. Perchance my mother will continue to live in expectation of the return of Shatrughna, but Kaushalya, the mother of that great hero will surely die! The king desired to transfer the throne to Prince Bharata, but this ambition will not be realised by him. A great and honourable duty will be fulfilled in performing the funeral ceremonies for my sire. The capital of the king abounding with beautiful terraces and parks, pleasant highways and tall houses encrusted with gems, crowded with horses, elephants and chariots, resounding with music, furnished with pleasure grounds, where happy and healthy people gather, is blessed by those who walk therein. O Guha, shall we, returning with Rama, the fulfiller of firm vows, when the fourteen years of exile are over, joyfully enter Ayodhya in his company?”

Guha said: “O Prince, thus keeping watch, the mighty Lakshmana, bearing his bow and arrows, passed the night. When the clear sun rose, the two princely brothers, on this selfsame bank of the sacred river caused their beautiful locks to be matted and were then conveyed by me, in safety, over the Ganges.

The royal brothers, heroic, resplendent and the subduers of their enemies, their hair matted, attired in bark, armed with bow and quiver, departed with Sita, looking back at me, like mighty elephants.”