Passing through a further doorway, thronged with people, Sumantra came to another gate where no guard stood. He beheld there many young men, alert, vigilant, and devoted to their master, armed with bows and axes, and wearing beautiful ear-rings. Beyond these, Sumantra saw aged men, clad in red, gorgeously attired, holding staves in their hands, guarding the apartments of the Queens. Seeing the virtuous Sumantra approaching with others, they stood respectfully at attention.

Sumantra, addressing these humble and experienced attendants, said: “Be pleased to inform Shri Ramacandra that Sumantra waits at the door.”

They, ever desiring the good of Rama, informed the prince and Sita of the arrival of Sumantra. Knowing Sumantra to be in the confidence of his royal father, Shri Rama affectionately caused him to be summoned.

The charioteer, entering there, perceived Shri Ramacandra resembling Kuvera himself, seated on a golden couch, spread with soft cushions and richly ornamented. His brow was anointed with pure and fragrant sandalwood-paste, the colour of the blood of a wild boar.

By his side the Princess Sita, as beautiful as the moon attended by the Citra planet, was seated, holding a camara in her hand.

Sumantra, versed in the customs of the court, offered respectful salutations to Shri Rama who appeared as resplendent as the noonday sun. With joined palms, Sumantra humbly enquired as to the prince’s welfare and addressed him who was thus seated on the couch, saying: “O Excellent Son of Queen Kaushalya, the king desires to see you in the apartment of Queen Kaikeyi, be pleased to go thither without delay.”

Thus addressed, that Lion among men, the most illustrious Ramacandra, filled with joy, on receiving the summons, replied: “Be it so, I will go thither with all speed.” Then turning to Sita, he said: “O Devi, my mother Kaikeyi, and my father have consulted each other concerning those matters relative to my installation. O Princess of Beautiful Eyes, my mother Kaikeyi, ever benevolent and accomplished, knowing the king’s desire, is influencing him for my good! That daughter of the great King of Kaikeya, ever obedient to my royal father desires my welfare. He, with his beloved queen, has sent for me through Sumantra, who is ever well-disposed to me, and desires what is pleasing to me, as does the king, my sire, and the queen, my mother. Assuredly, to-day the king will proclaim me regent. I shall go to my royal father in all haste, do you converse happily with your maids of honour.”

Hearing these courteous words, spoken by her lord, the lotus-eyed Princess Sita reciting the Peace Chant, followed Shri Ramacandra to the door. She said: “O Maharaj, the kingdom has many learned brahmins who will crown you, as Indra was crowned by Brahma. When the preliminary initiation is completed and you dost perform the Rajasuya sacrifice and I behold you dressed in an antelope skin with the deer’s horns in your hand, do you then allow me to pay you homage. May Indra in the east protect you, may Yama in the south protect you, may Varuna in the west protect you, may Kuvera in the north protect you.”

Having taken leave of Sita, Shri Rama left his palace with Sumantra. Shri Rama, going forth from his palace, as a lion issues from his cave, beheld Shri Lakshmana humbly waiting at the door.

At the middle gate, Shri Rama encountered his friends and honoured those who had gathered there to witness his coronation. Then that Lion among men, the son of King Dasaratha, mounted his chariot resplendent as flame, spread with tiger skins and which, on its course, made a noise like thunder. Inlaid with gold and gems, it dazzled the beholders as does the brightness of the sun. The horses yoked to the chariot, equalling young elephants, galloped as swiftly as the steeds of Indra.

Shri Rama, seated in his resplendent chariot moving rapidly with a sound as of thunder issuing from the clouds, appeared like the moon coursing in the heavens. His younger brother, Prince Lakshmana attended him standing behind him in the chariot, with a camara in his hand.

On every side, shouts of “Jai! Jai!” arose, while the multitude followed Shri Rama’s chariot with its cavalcade of mounted horsemen and mountain-like elephants. Warriors whose brows were anointed with sandalwood paste and ambergris, preceded the royal chariot bearing naked swords in their hands. Then followed the musicians and bards singing their praises and the shouts of warriors resembling the roaring of lions. The chariot went forward amid a rain of flowers showered down from the balconies and windows by beautifully adorned women, of faultless limbs, who thus offered salutations to Rama and desirous of his welfare chanted hymns of adoration, saying: “O Delight of Your Mother, whose heart to-day is raised in exultation because of you; to-day your royal mother will see you in possession of the throne.

“The Princess Sita, exceedingly dear to Rama is esteemed the most fortunate woman in the world by womankind who, believing her to have practised a high degree of virtue and ascetism in a previous birth, say, “As the planet Rohini found union with the moon, so has the Princess Sita found union with Rama.”

Hearing the delightful eulogies of the women, Raghava pressed on, listening to the converse of the citizens and those come from afar, concerning his approaching coronation. Some said: “To-day, Shri Ramacandra, our lord, will acquire limitless wealth and power through the favour of his royal sire. Those people over whom he holds sway, will obtain their heart’s desire and the fulfilment of their ambitions. Should he enjoy the kingdom for long, it will be our gain, since no distress will visit the kingdom while he is king.”

Thus preceded by neighing horses and the praises of his dynasty sung by chroniclers and bards, Rama advanced like the god Kuvera, while on every side he beheld the decorated highways filled with male and female elephants, chariots, horses and people and stalls overflowing with gems and merchandise.