The valiant Bharata, regaining consciousness, his eyes suffused with tears, perceived his mother filled with distress. Seated in the midst of his counsellors, he poured forth reproaches on his mother saying: “It was never my desire to rule, nor did I consult my mother in this matter; I was not acquainted with the king’s intention to confer the crown on Rama, being far from the capital with Shatrughna. I knew nought of the exile of Shri Rama, Lakshmana and Sita, nor how it came to pass. My heart is filled with anguish.”

Kaushalya, hearing the sound of Bharata’s weeping, said to Sumitra: “Bharata, the son of the cruel Kaikeyi, has come, I wish to see the prudent Bharata.”

The queen, pale and weak on account of her separation from Rama, advanced trembling to where Bharata was, while the prince with his brother Shatrughna started likewise for the apartment of the queen. The two brothers beheld the wretched queen proceeding with tottering footsteps and were filled with distress. Bowing down to Kaushalya, they wept bitterly, then the chief queen embraced Bharata sobbing with grief and said: “It was your desire to rule and your cruel mother has accomplished this matter without hindrance, but for what reason has this pitiless queen sent my son to the forest in ascetic’s garb? Let Queen Kaikeyi banish me also to that region where my illustrious and golden-complexioned Rama abides! If not, I will go together with Sumitra to where Rama dwells, preceded by the sacrificial fire. O Bharata, do you take me to where my son, that lion among men, in great affliction is practising asceticism. Queen Kaikeyi has made you sovereign of this country, replete with wealth, grain, horses, elephants and chariots.”

Hearing the bitter words of Queen Kaushalya, Bharata was pained as a man who suffers when his wound is probed by a lancet. Agitated and confused, he fell at the feet of the queen lamenting. Then growing composed, with joined palms, he addressed the sorrowing queen: “O Mother, you knowest how great is my love for Rama and also that I am innocent in this matter. Why dost you reproach me? May he, who is the cause of the exile of Rama, forget the teachings of the Vedas and the holy tradition. May he, who has given his consent to the exile of Rama, become a slave of the lowest caste or incur the sin of killing a cow. May such a man be subject to the same punishment as one who withholds the wages of his labourers. May he who has consented to the banishment of the holy prince, bear the same guilt as one rebelling against a king, who protects his subjects as his own offspring! May the guilt of a king taking the sixth part of the revenue of his people and yet failing to protect them, be his, who exiled Rama.

“MLay the fruits of the sin incurred by one who, well-equipped with elephants, horses and chariots and all weapons, does not fight according to the law of righteousness, be his! May he, who agreed to the exile of Rama, forget the teachings of Vedanta which ensure happiness, and all the secrets obtained from his spiritual preceptor by serving him! May such a one not live to see the coronation of Prince Rama whose countenance equals the sun and moon in splendour. May that wretch incur the sin of one, who, partaking of milk and rice, does not make an offering to his ancestors and guests or to the gods. May he be guilty of not honouring his spiritual preceptor by offering salutations to him in a fitting manner.

“May that wretch, who gave consent to the exile of Rama, bear the same guilt as one who strikes a cow, reviles his Guru or betrays his friends! May he incur the guilt of one who forswears his trust. May he, who participated in the exile of Rama, reap the sin of one who does not do good to others.

“May the wretch, who ordered the exile of Rama, bear the guilt of one, who, partaking of sweetmeats, fails to share them with his servants, women, children or those surrounding him, or one who, living on excellent food, gives to his inferiors that which is raw and ill-cooked. May he, by whom Rama was sent into exile, die without marrying a woman of his own caste or producing offspring or performing the fire ritual! May he not behold the offspring born of his spouse! May his years be brief! May he be slain in battle, retreating from a superior foe in fear, or may he be as one who slays a fleeing enemy. May he, like one dressed in rags, demented, carrying a skull in his hand, wander about begging from door to door! May he who has conspired to send Rama to the forest be given over to wine, women and gambling and become an object of contempt on account of his concupiscence and anger. May he ever indulge in the practice of unrighteousness and forget his duty and distribute immense wealth in charity to the undeserving! May the accumulated wealth and extensive possessions of the one who has furthered the exile of Rama, be stolen away by thieves. May the sin of him who sleeps at sunrise or sunset be his! May the sin of him who is guilty of arson or looks with desire on the wife of his spiritual preceptor or who betrays his friend, be his, who has advocated the exile of Shri Rama! May he, who acquiesced in the exile of Rama be deprived of the worship of his ancestors and parents as also of the funeral rites! May such a one, even now, be driven from the society of good people and lose the renown and merit of companionship with the virtuous! May his mind never be devoted to such deeds as are undertaken by the righteous! May that man who sought to exile Rama, fail to obey his mother and ever be employed n evil deeds! May he maintain a large family in extreme poverty! May he, ever restless, be consumed with fever! May he be guilty of that sin incurred by one, who fails to satisfy a miserable suppliant who looks to him for succour! May he be deceitful, slanderous, base, depraved and ever walk in fear of authority 1 May he incur the guilt of one who disregards his chaste and devoted wife, who approaches him in the season of her flowering! May he be dull-witted and abandoning his lawful spouse, may he five in sin with other women! May the guilt of a brahmin who abandons his children, who are dying of hunger be his! May he be like one who defiles a reservoir or administers poison to another! May that man lose the power of his limbs, as he who seeks to impede the hospitality to be shown to a brahmin, by speaking ill of him! May his be the sin of one who drinks the milk of the cow that possesses unweaned calves! May he incur the sin of him, who, having water in his dwelling, turns the thirsty man from his door! May he bear the guilt of him, who arbitrating between two learned disputants, grants victory to the one he favours!”

With these words, Prince Bharata, seeking to console Queen Kaushalya for the separation from her son, fell to the ground, overcome with distress.

The queen then addressed him, who, distraught and afflicted, seeking to establish his innocence, had fallen to the earth, and said: “My Son, my pain is increased by the words you have uttered but fortunate it is that the hearts of Lakshmana and thyself are fixed in love of your brother. Assuredly you will enter the region attained by the blest.”

Then the queen, taking the mighty-armed prince in her lap, wept aloud.

The prince whose heart was rent with grief also wept in an excess of sorrow. Caressed by the queen, lamenting wildly, lying on the earth and sighing heavily, he passed the night in this wise.