The following year, spring having returned once more, the king, desiring to complete the sacrifice for the sake of an heir, paid homage to Shri Vasishtha, offering him humble salutations according to the prescribed ordinance, and addressed that great brahmin with submission, saying:—

“O Great Sage, be pleased to complete the holy ceremony according to the sacred tradition. Let it be so undertaken that no interference may take place. You are compassionate and your heart is inclined towards me. You are also my Guru, the burden of the sacrifice must be borne by you.”

The most excellent sage replied, “Be it so. I will do as you desirest.”

Hereafter, Shri Vasishtha summoned those brahmins,.able to perform the holy rituals and also artificers, architects, writers, actors and dancers.

Addressing the learned priests, he said: “At the king’s command, inaugurate the great sacrifice. Cause bricks in thousands to be brought hither with all speed and erect many kinds of dwellings, well arranged, furnished with food and every comfort to accommodate royal and other guests. Prepare hundreds of beautiful houses on suitable sites, together with provisions and all things needed by brahmins; erect also large buildings for the people of other lands, and store food and articles of comfort where it is best to do so. Fine and well-equipped houses should be built for villagers. Ensure that hospitality in the form of food and refreshment be given with courtesy and kindness. Those attending the sacrifice should be entertained with respect and consideration, being received in a becoming manner, according to their caste. Let no affront be offered to any through greed, anger or lust. Let craftsmen and servants be suitably regarded, so that their hearts be set on their task and let no one act disruptively. Treat all in a spirit of goodwill and courtesy, so that the work may be successfully accomplished.”

The people listened to the holy sage and answered, “We will act according to your instructions, O Sage, nothing shall be omitted.”

Shri Vasishtha then summoned the chief minister Sumantra and said: “Send out invitations to the sacrifice to all the righteous kings of the earth and also the brahmins, kshatriyas, vaishyas and shudras of every country, but go first to the great Sovereign of Mithila, the heroic Janaka, eminent in truth, the greatest of warriors and a knower of the Veda, since he is an ancient ally of King Dasaratha. Thereafter, bring the evertruthful King of Kashi, of exemplary conduct, equal to a god; and then the aged and virtuous King of Kaikeya, our sovereign’s father-in-law, and invite his son also. Call the fortunate King Lomapada of Anga, the intimate friend of the King, and bring hither, with respect, Koshala, the King of Magadha.

“Thereafter, send messengers to the kings of the eastern countries of Sindhu, Souriva, and Sourashtra, and the monarchs of the south, with other great kings of the earth; let them come with their brothers, relations, retainers and servants.”

Having heard the words of Shri Vasishtha, Sumantra carried out the instructions given by him, dispatching invitations by special messengers to the monarchs of many lands, himself going forth to escort some of the great kings.

Sumantra having departed, all the workers employed in the sacrifice informed the holy sage of their progress, and he advised them further saying: “Let nothing be presented to any without due respect, even in jest; gifts given with contempt lead to the destruction of the giver.”

A few days later, the kings from afar arrived at the sacrificial pavilion bearing gifts of gems.

Then Shri Vasishtha, being pleased, said: “O King, at your command, all the kings have come and been received by me with due hospitality. The preparations for the sacrifice are now completed, be pleased to enter the sacrificial pavilion and inspect the articles needed for the ceremony. See how well your servants have furnished everything requisite and have gratified your every wish.”

On the recommendation of the Sage Vasishtha and Rishyasringa, King Dasaratha went to the sacrificial ground at an auspicious time, when a propitious star was in the ascendant. Then the learned brahmins and Shri Vasishtha elected Rishyasringa as chief priest.

The sacrifice began in accordance with the ancient ordinance and the king, with his queens, engaged in the preliminary initiations.