Filled with anguish on hearing the harsh words of Queen Kaushalya, the king began to reflect on what could be done. Regaining consciousness, he sighed heavily and began to ponder within himself. He then remembered how, formerly, he had slain a young ascetic inadvertently by a sound-directed arrow, in the forest.

The monarch was now subject to a dual cause of grief, the recollection of his former evil deed and his banishment of Rama. Thus afflicted, with bowed head, the king addressed the queen in faltering tones: “O Kaushalya, ever compassionate to thine enemies, I entreat you, with joined palms, not to look on me with hostility. O Lady, to the wife, the husband is a deity be he virtuous or worthless, this is the eternal law. I know you to be wise and acquainted with what is proper and improper, it is not meet that you should utter these wounding words.”

Hearing this plaintive speech, tears welled from the eyes of the queen like falling rain and taking his hands in hers, she addressed the king, saying: “O Lord, do not grieve, be at peace, see, I lay my head at your feet, do not entreat me, it is as death to me! I have spoken what ought not to be uttered, pardon my transgression! That woman is not nobly bred, who expects her lord to solicit her with humble words. O Sire, I am acquainted with a woman’s duty and I know you to be a lover of virtue. What I have said was uttered involuntarily through distress on account of my son. Grief destroys patience, grief destroys the understanding, there is nothing more destructive than grief! The blow of an unknown enemy may be endured but the distress arising from grief is not easily borne, even with resignation. This is only the fifth night since the exile of Rama but to me they are as five years. Sorrow has driven away every joy from my breast and because of Rama my pain increases, agitating my heart as the waters of a swiftly flowing river disturb the ocean.”

While the queen was yet speaking, the sun declined and the night fell. Consoled by the words of Queen Kaushalya, the king, wearied with grief, sank into slumber.