Knowing the foetus to be divided into seven parts, Diti was greatly perturbed and said to Indra:—

“Through my fault has this come to pass; O Indra, you are in no wise guilty. This child being divided, for your good and mine own, I declare that these seven shall become the protectors of the forty-nine winds. These seven sons of divine appearance shall be known as the Bala-kanda winds. Let one wander about in the region of Brahma, another in the region of Indra, and the third in space. Let the remaining four winds go anywhere under your instructions; may they all be known by the name of Maruts, conferred on them by you.”

With joined palms, the thousand-eyed god Indra said in reply to Diti: “O Devi, it will assuredly come to pass as you desires. Your sons shall wander about in the form of devas in the Tapovana forest.”

Thus reconciled and fully satisfied the mother and son ascended to heaven.

Thus have I heard, O Rama! This is that Tapovana forest in which Indra formerly served his mother Diti. O Lion among Men, here a great city was founded by the righteous Prince Vishala, the son of King Ikswaku and Alambusa.

O Rama, the mighty son of Vishala was named Hemacandra, and his son was the renowned Sucandra. O Rama, the son of Sucandra was Dhumrashva and his son was Srinjaya. The glorious Sahadeva was the son of Srinjaya and the son of Sahadeva was the highly virtuous Krishashva.

The son of Krishashva was Somadatta and his son was Kakustha. The most illustrious and invincible of warriors King Pramati the son of Kakustha, is the present ruler of Vishala.

By the grace of King Ikswaku all the rulers of Vishala are long lived, virtuous and mighty.

O Rama, let us pass the night here, and to-morrow we will wait upon King Janaka.

When the powerful King Pramati heard of Shri Vishvamitra’s arrival in his kingdom, he went with his spiritual preceptor and relatives to welcome him.

With joined palms, they offered him due worship and enquired as to his welfare. The king said: “O Muni, to-day I am indeed fortunate that you have been gracious enough to visit my kingdom. None is more blessed than I.”