Commanded by Shri Rama, Lakshmana went to the house of the Rishi Suyajna. Beholding the rishi seated in his sacrificial pavilion, he made obeisance to him and said: “Renouncing the kingdom, Shri Ramacandra is entering the forest, come in all haste to see him embark on this arduous undertaking.”

Having performed his evening devotion, the Rishi Suyajna, in company with Prince Lakshmana, entered the beautifiil and enchanting palace of Shri Rama. Perceiving this knower of the Veda to have come, Shri Rama and Sita rose and with joined palms welcomed the rishi with reverence. Offering him salutations, Shri Rama bestowed on him alms, beautiful ornaments, jewelled earrings, necklaces of precious gems strung on golden thread, amulets and other jewels, and at Sita’s instance, said: “O Peaceful Rishi, be gracious enough to accept this necklace and gold which Shri Sita offers to your spouse, also the bracelets and rings of beaten gold and jewelled bangles; about to enter the forest, Shri Sita offers them to your wife. Accept also this soft pure couch with a coverlet embroidered with precious stones, pearls and tassels. This elephant also, named Shatranjaya, which my uncle gave me, I present to you, O Great Rishi, together with a thousand golden coins.”

Suyajna, requested by Shri Rama, accepted all the gifts, and gave his blessings to Rama, Lakshmana and Sita. Then Rama, ever of sweet speech, addressed Lakshmana as Brahma addresses Indra, saying: “O Lakshmana, call hither the two excellent sons of the Rishi Agastya and Shri Vishvamitra, and honour them with gifts of gems. Give to each in abundance as a field of corn is visited by rain, a thousand cows, gold, silver, jewels and ornaments. To that brahmin, versed in the Taittirya who daily, with devotion, gives his blessing to Queen Kaushalya and Sumitra, who is learned in the Vedanta and experienced in all matters, give vehicles, silken robes and women attendants, so that he may be wholly satisfied. To my confidential adviser, Citaratha, who has served me over a long period, give precious jewels, cloths and abundant wealth, and to the brahmacaris, my fellow students who study the Veda and are of excellent conduct, following no profession, living detached, enjoying good food, yet dependent on alms, give to each of these a thousand cows. O Lakshmana, bestow on them eighty camels apiece loaded with jewels, a thousand bullocks loaded with rice and two hundred bulls for tilling the ground. O Lakshmana, give them cows so that they may enjoy butter, milk and curds, and to each of the brahmacaris attending on Queen Kaushalya give a thousand cows and a thousand golden coins and give them abundant alms so that my mother may be pleased with us.”

Obeying the commands of Prince Rama, Shri Lakshmana offered hospitality to the brahmins. Like Kuvera, he gave to every brahmin abundant wealth as instructed by his brother. Then Shri Rama, seeing his servants standing near him weeping, bestowed on them sufficient wealth for their entire lives and said: “Until I return from the forest, keep watch on the palace belonging to Shri Lakshmana and myself.”

Then all wept overcome at the thought of his departure, and Rama turning to his treasurer said: “Bring hither my wealth,” and they heaped quantities of gold and silver before him, wonderfill to behold. Then Rama with the aid of Lakshmana distributed it among the aged, the sick and the needy.

Now, there was a certain brahmin of the family of Garga, whose name was Trijata, whose complexion was pale on account of much privation. He, toiling honestly, went to the forest daily with spade, axe and plough, maintaining his family on the fruits and flowers of the forest. His wife, worn down with much poverty, gathering her young children together, addressed her husband, saying: “Abandoning your plough and spade, follow my instructions. Go with all speed and approach the virtuous Shri Ramacandra, undoubtedly you shalt obtain something there.”

The brahmin, covering himself with a few wretched rags, set out for Shri Rama’s palace, his countenance, in lustre, resembling that of the Rishi Bhrigu or Angiras.

Entering the fifth gate unchallenged, he came to where the multitude were assembled and approaching Shri Ramacandra, said: “O Illustrious Prince, I am destitute of wealth and having many children, subsist on what I find in the forest, look upon me with compassion.”

Shri Rama answered jestingly: “I have still many thousand cows not yet bestowed on any. Casting your staff from this spot, I will bestow on you as many cows as can stand in the space between you and where the staff has fallen.”

Trijata, hearing these words, binding his rags firmly about his waist, twirling his staff, threw it away with all his might. The staff fell on the further bank of the river Sarayu where thousands of royal cows and bulls were grazing. Shri Rama ordered all these to be driven to the brahmin’s hermitage and thus addressed him: “Be not displeased, O Brahmin, that I jested with you; I desired to test your great powers. Now, the cattle will be driven to thine abode, ask further whatsoever you desirest. O Brahmin, I will bestow anything you asks on you; all my wealth is to be given to the brahmins. Nothing so pleases me as the bestowal of my wealth on brahmins such as you, bringing me renown.”

Then the brahmin Trijata highly gratified, taking the cows, departed with his wife, full of power, renown and devotion, blessing Shri Ramacandra.

Thereafter, Rama bestowed the remainder of his wealth, acquired through virtue, upon his friends, honouring them with marks of respect. There was not a brahmin, servant, pauper or beggar that he did not honour with charity at that time.