King Dasaratha lying on the ground in utter ignominy, resembled King Yayati fallen from heaven. The cruel queen, seeing her purpose yet unaccomplished, herself fearless yet inspiring terror in the heart of the king, again demanded the boons, saying:—

“O King, you didst ever deem thyself a man of truth and one faithful to his vows, why dost you then withhold the boons promised to me?”

After some time, the monarch exceedingly disquieted, replied in anger:—

“O Sinful Woman, after my death when Ramacandra, the chief of men, has gone into exile, you mayest accomplish your purpose. In heaven, the gods will enquire concerning the welfare of Shri Ramacandra. If I reply that I have sent Rama into exile to please Kaikeyi, it will be looked upon as a falsehood, and none will believe it. Having passed innumerable years without a son, how should I, after long suffering and anxiety, being blessed with an heir, forsake the long-armed Rama?

“How can Rama, valorous, learned, tolerant and forbearing, whose eyes are like lotuses, be driven into exile by me? How should I send the beautiful Rama, whose complexion is like the blue lotus, to the Dandaka forest? Shri Rama, meriting every comfort and pleasure, undeserving of sorrow, how can I behold that wise Ramacandra in distress?

“Had I died without seeing Rama afflicted, who merits no suffering whatsoever, my spirit would have experienced joy in heaven. O Pitiless, O Sinful Kaikeyi, why, why dost you compel me to send my dear and truthful son, Shri Ramacandra, to the forest? I shall incur dishonour throughout the whole world.”

Thus lamenting and distracted, evening having fallen and the night creeping on apace, King Dasaratha afflicted and in great anguish, experienced no delight on beholding the moon. The old king, sighing heavily, continued to lament, and gazing at the starry sky cried: “O Night, adorned with stars, do not pass into the dawn. O Auspicious Night, with great humility, I supplicate you, have pity on me and do not pass away. I have no desire to behold the face of this cruel 'Kaikeyi, who has caused me immeasurable distress.”

Then the monarch again entreated Kaikeyi saying: “A virtuous man and yet wretched, I take refuge in you, for I have only a short while to live. O Auspicious One! Know this; I am a king and not alone but in the royal assembly have I proclaimed Rama as regent. Be gracious unto me, O Kaikeyi, O Child, O Giver of Delight! Grant imperishable rulership to Shri Ramacandra and endear thyself to me. O Kaikeyi, thus shalt you obtain great renown.

“O You of beautiful face, let Rama be installed, so shalt you cause pleasure to Shri Ramacandra, to Bharata, to the court, nay to the whole world.”

Then the pure-hearted sovereign, his eyes reddened in his distress burst into a flood of tears, but the wicked Kaikeyi disregarded both his flattery and his weeping.

The king, realising the exile of Shri Rama could not be avoided, fell senseless to the earth. Sighing deeply at every moment, King Dasaratha passed the night in great anguish.

At dawn, the royal musicians striking up to awaken the great monarch, were ordered by him to be silent.