Bharata having departed to Ayodhya, Shri Rama perceived that the ascetics living on Cittrakuta were filled with apprehension and desirous of withdrawing from that place.

Formerly, these holy men dwelling in Cittrakuta looked for Shri Rama’s protection, but now they sought to take their departure. By the expression in their eyes and other signs, they manifested their misgivings and could be observed conversing secretly in low tones with one another.

Shri Rama, beholding their anxiety addressed them with humility, saying: “O Blessed Ones, has my conduct towards you suffered a change? For what reason are your hearts filled with dread? O Holy Ones, has my younger brother involuntarily injured you? Or has Shri Sita, ever devoted to my service, given you cause for offence? Perchance she has done that which is not fitting for a woman?”

Thus questioned, a great sage, an aged ascetic, his frame emaciated by austerities, tremblingly answered the Ever-Compassionate One, saying: “O Child, bounteous to all that lives, Shri Sita is innocent of any breach of the traditional attitude to any, least of all towards holy men. In truth, the reason is that the asuras, through enmity to you, have begun to oppress the sages, and therefore, they being terrified, seek how they may defend themselves in secret.

“Ravana’s younger brother Kara, who dwells here, is casting out the ascetics from their hermitages. O Friend, he is inexorable and he is a mighty warrior. He is brutal and cannot endure your presence here. Since you have come to dwell in this hermitage, the asuras have increased the persecution of the sages. Appearing in grotesque and terrible forms, they fill them with terror, then to do them further mischief, they fling unclean and inauspicious objects into the sacred precincts, finally when meeting with guileless and pure-hearted hermits, they slay them. Those evil-hearted asuras wander everywhere covertly, till perceiving a sage to be alone and defenceless, they put an end to his life.

“At the time of sacrifice, when the sacred fire is kindled by the ascetics, then do the asuras, scattering the hallowed vessels and ladles,, quench the fire by discharging water over it and destroying the utensils. O Shri Ramacandra, weary of these wicked asuras, the sages are urging us to abandon these hermitages and depart hence.

“O Rama, those terrible asuras threaten to slay us all, therefore, we are leaving this hermitage. Not far distant is the wonderful Tapovana belonging to the Maharishi Ashva; it is rich in fruits and roots, there we would dwell. O Friend, if it seem proper to you, do you come there, for thine oppression is also planned.

“O Prince, though you are able to defend thyself, your sojourn here with your holy consort is fraught with peril.”

Hearing the words of Kulupati and perceiving their anxiety to be gone, Shri Rama sought to persuade them to stay, but in vain, and the sages departed. Shri Rama accompanied them a short distance then, taking leave of them and offering obeisance to them, returned to his sacred dwelling. On leaving the holy men, they instructed him lovingly in the path of duty and bade him farewell.

Shri Rama did not then abandon the hermitage, which the sages had deserted. Among them were a few who, inspired by Rama’s example, had surrendered their hearts to him, and of them the prince was ever mindful.