Shri Rama, together with Lakshmana, addressed Shri Bharata, saying: “O Bharata, say why you are come hither to the forest in ascetic’s garb, clothed in bark and deerskin? For what purpose, O Prince, hast you, abandoning your throne, come to the forest, attired in the skin of the antelope?”

Thus questioned, Shri Bharata controlling his grief, answered: “O Noble Sire, my father, the king, by my mother acting in an improper manner, has died of grief through separation from his son. O Mighty Prince, my mother has done an exceedingly evil deed and forfeited her fair name. Widowed and overwhelmed with affliction, she will fall into hell. Though the son of Kaikeyi, yet am I your servant. Be gracious to me and allow thyself to be installed to-day and ascend the throne like Indra. The elders of the people and my widowed mother have come hither to entreat you. Be pleased to grant our request, O Lord.

“O You who payest due deference to all men, being the eldest son of the king, should by right occupy the throne. Accept the burden of kingship and gratify the desire of your friends. The earth, obtaining you as her Lord, will rest satisfied as the winter night in the presence of the moon. Not only am I your brother, but your devoted follower and servant. I and my ministers salute you and beg of you to look with favour on our request.

“O Chief of Men, let not these counsellors and those who have traditionally held office, plead in vain.”

Having spoken, Prince Bharata, his eyes suffused with tears, placed his head at the feet of Shri Rama. Shri Rama lifting him up embraced Prince Bharata who was sighing like one distraught, and said: “O Bharata, why should a virtuous and enlightened prince such as you, act so that his elder brother commit sin? O Hero, I see no fault in you, but it behoves you not to speak ill of your mother. O Sinless One, the father or the spiritual preceptor can order his disciple, his servant or his wife as he will. Therefore, it must be known to you, that a wise son or devotee should ever manifest obedience. I am, therefore, submissive to my sire.

“O Lovely One, we are subject to the king and it is one if he send us to the forest, to the abode of ascetics, or retain us in his proximity. O Chief of the Virtuous, a mother should be revered even as the father. O Bharata, by the command of my pious mother and father, I was sent to the forest, how should I dare to disobey them?

“Do you, O Prince, return to the capital and acclaimed by the people, ascend the throne, while I reside in the forest as an ascetic. Remember, thus did the king resolve in the presence of his people and now he has departed. The sovereign is the instructor of his people and of you also, and it was meet he should do as he has done. O Bharata, do you enjoy the kingdom given you by my father.

“O Beautiful One, I shall remain in the Dandaka forest for fourteen years and enjoy what my father has conferred on me. The illustrious monarch, my sire, honoured by the whole world, has commanded me to come to the forest and to obey him is my happiness.

“Meseems the sovereignty of the whole world is vain if it be mine in defiance of my father’s command.”