Having heard the words of the wise Vishvamitra, Shri Shatananda, the eldest son of the Sage Gautama, resplendent by virtue of his practice of Yoga, was filled with wonder and delight and, beholding Shri Rama was astonished.

Seeing the two princes sitting at their ease, Shri Shatananda said to the Sage Vishvamitra: “O Holy Sage, was my mother, so long involved in the practice of austerity, shown by you to Shri Ramacandra? O Illustrious One, did my mother entertain these two heroes worthy of adoration with fruits and those things she was able to obtain in the hermitage?

“O Holy Rishi, didst you relate the story of the improper behaviour of Indra to my mother in bygone days, to Shri Ramacandra? O Holy One, by virtue of the advent of Shri Rama, did my mother obtain my father’s favour once more? O Kaushika, did my father duly honour Shri Ramacandra and is this Illustrious One, having received the hospitality of my parents, really come hither? O Holy Sage, please tell me; when my tranquil-minded sire entered the hermitage, was he honoured by Shri Rama?”

Shri Vishvamitra, skilled in the art of converse and acquainted with the laws of rhetoric, answered Shri Shatananda saying:—

“O Great Muni, I did that which should be done, by speaking that which was proper to the occasion, and patiently listening to that which was spoken, recollecting my duty. As Jamadagni, who first cursed Renuka and was then reconciled to her, so has your father shown favour to your mother and received her again.”

Hearing the words of Shri Vishvamitra, the great Shatananda addressed Shri Ramacandra, saying: “O Great One, may your coming be the source of prosperity to hll. It is fortunate indeed that you didst visit my father’s hermitage and restore my mother to her former state. How can I sufficiently praise that mighty Sage Shri Vishvamitra, reverenced by all the sages. O Rama, enlightened are his actions; by virtue of his holy practices he has become a brahmarishi though previously a royal sage. Among brahmarishis he is unique, he is known to me as one who is ever concerned with the good of all. O Rama, none is equal to you on earth, since you are protected by so great a sage as Vishvamitra. Hear while I relate the story of the great Kaushika to you:—

“In the past, this holy sage was a virtuous monarch, versed in all branches of learning, delighting in the welfare of his subjects and the destroyer of his foes.

“Kusha, the righteous and powerful king, was the son of Prajapati, and his son was Gadhi, and the great and illustrious Sage Vishvamitra is the son of Gadhi.

“On ascending the throne, King Vishvamitra ruled the earth for many thousands of years. At a certain time, King Vishvamitra, assembling his army, set out to range the earth. O Rama, he passed through many cities and kingdoms and crossed innumerable rivers, mountains and forests, visiting many hermitages till he came to the one belonging to Shri Vasishtha. This hermitage was thickly planted with many-branched trees with dense foliage in which birds of every kind dwelt. Many species of beasts frequented that place, and the siddhas also came there—devas, gandharvas and other celestial beings added to the peace and beauty of that hermitage by their presence. Beautifiil birds flew about and peaceful deer wandered here and there. Many learned brahmins also dwelt in that hermitage.

“Brahmin sages and also celestial rishis inhabited that place, so that it shone like fire by virtue of their presence. This hermitage sheltered many great Vedic scholars equal to Brahma, some living only on air, some on water, some on dry leaves. Other sages lived on fruit and roots, and there were in addition thousands of brahmacaris fully self-subdued.

“Each sage observed the sacred traditions, performing his morning and evening devotions, repeating the silent prayer (japa) offering water to the spirits of his ancestors, and pouring oblations into the sacrificial fire.

“Many retired householders practising Yoga, dwelt there with their wives. Verily that hermitage resembled the abode of Brahma, and the great and powerful King Vishvamitra rejoiced to behold it.”