O Rama, hearing the words of the king, the hundred sons of Shri Vasishtha were filled with wrath and said: “O You Evil-minded Wretch, discouraged by your spiritual preceptor, how dost you dare to seek our aid? O King, we know you to be an ignorant man. Shri Vasishtha is able to advance the sacrifices of the three worlds, verily you are no true disciple of such a sage. Shall we render void the utterance of our great sire?”

Hearing these harsh words, the king replied: “Discouraged by my Guru and now by you, I shall seek elsewhere for aid; may all be well with you.”

The sons of the great sage were enraged on hearing these words spoken in defiance, and cursed the king, saying: “Mayest you become one of the fallen caste.” Having thus cursed him, they returned to their hermitage.

When the night was over, the king was transformed into a low-born being, his complexion dark, his body emaciated, his head shaven, his whole frame besmeared with ashes from the crematorium, his golden ornaments changed to lead.

When the people of the capital beheld the king in this condition they fled from that place, and Trishanku departed, full of anguish. Sunk in grief day and night, he finally sought refuge with Shri Vishvamitra. That sage seeing the monarch deprived of his kingdom and condemned to assume the form of a low-caste being, was moved with compassion, and addressed him saying: “O Mighty Prince, mayest you be prosperous! Why hast you come hither? I know you to be the Sovereign of Ayodhya that through a curse art come to this state.”

The eloquent King Trishanku, with joined palms, replied in tones of submission: “O Great One, discouraged by my Guru and his sons in my desire to enter heaven in the physical body, I have been transformed by them into a chandala. Now, for shame, I may not show myself to any. O Lord, I have failed to obtain the fruit of countless sacrifices, an untruth has never been uttered by me, I have governed my people with righteousness and by my conduct have satisfied my spiritual preceptor and holy men. I desired to undertake a further meritorious sacrifice, but O Great Sage, my Guru has withheld his aid. O Lord, destiny is irrevocable, destiny is inexorable, none can withstand it. All are ruled by destiny. O Divine Sage, be favourable to me, who am fallen into distress! Besides you, there is none in whom I can take refuge. O Holy One, by your spiritual energy, avert this evil fate.”