Rama, the lover of his people, having spoken, ceased; then the pious Bharata answered Rama, putting forth persuasive arguments of righteous purport, saying: “O Lord, who is there in this world like you? Adversity does not move you, nor does any agreeable thing touch you. All look on you as their superior, yet you seeks counsel of thine elders!

“The man to whom the living and dead are one and who is indifferent as to what he possesses or loses, for what reason should he grieve? O Lord, those who like you, know, as you dost, what is the nature of the soul and its essence, are not moved in the hour of distress!

“O Prince of Raghu, like the gods, you are magnanimous, you are ever forbearing and faithful to your vows. You are wise, you knowest and seest all! You are aware of the motives of men’s actions and the cause of their abandoning them, therefore, that distress which is insupportable to others, does not, in any wise, disturb you.”

Having spoken thus, Bharata continued: “O Rama, be gracious to me, though during my absence in a strange land, my mother committed those sins which cause my affliction. I am bound by the ties of duty, else would I have slain my wicked mother. What is evil and what is good is known to me, descended as I am from the righteous King Dasaratha, therefore I am unable to act contrary to virtue. I cannot speak evil in the assembly of my pious and aged father, who has passed away, and where is a man to be found so wholly acquainted with the law of righteousness as was the king, yet what person familiar with the moral law, would commit so great a wrong prompted by the desire to please a woman? There is an ancient saying that, at the approach of death, man loses the power of judgment! The king has verily justified this adage to the whole world! Through fear of Queen Kaikeyi’s wrath or her threat of self-imposed destruction, or through mental agitation, the king may have acted thus without consulting his subjects, but you are not bound by such a deed. He who imputes the transgressions of his father to righteous motives is not considered a good son; as heir to the king, reveal not the errors of your sire, but conceal this unjust deed from the world.

“O Hero, it is your duty to save my mother Kaikeyi, my father, my relatives and myself from the consequences of this action condemned by all. O Brother, remember your duty as a warrior and reflect on the outcome of your sojourn in the forest as an ascetic, but do you also consider the good of your people. It becomes you not to undertake this course of action. The first duty of a warrior is to be installed so that he may be able to protect his people. Say, why should a man giving up that which is an established duty, embrace that which is wretched, cheerless, visionary and undefined? If, O Blessed One, you desirest to undertake this mortification, why dost you not seek it through the arduous labour of ruling the four castes? It is said that the duty of the householder is the highest dharma, then, why dost you abandon it?

“O Lord, hear me; I am but your child in respect of learning, age and state, how should I be able to govern the kingdom? I, a child, void of understanding and virtue and in rank also thine inferior; how should I be able to live without you much less rule in your stead? Therefore, O Raghava, O You Virtuous One, do you, with your relatives govern the kingdom without opposition and acquire merit 1 The great sage, the Holy Vasishtha, is here present with the ministers and priests, permit thyself to be crowned and return with us to Ayodhya!

“As Indra, having conquered his foes, entered heaven attended by the Maruts, do you enter Ayodhya, thereby discharging your duties to the gods, the sages, and thine ancestors, gratifying the ambitions of your friends! Regard me as your servant and command me! O Noble One, let your friends to-day rejoice at thine enthronement and let the evil doers flee to the uttermost ends of the earth! O Chief of Men, wash away the taint of my mother’s guilt and deliver our great parent from this heinous sin. With my head bent in submission, I entreat you; as Shri Vishnu shows his compassion to all beings, do you show mercy to us. Should you however reject my prayer and go hence to some other forest, then will I follow you there!”

Shri Rama, thus entreated by Shri Bharata, who had placed his head at the feet of his brother in humility, still remained steadfast in his vow and did not waver or consent to return to Ayodhya. Beholding the constancy of Shri Rama, all present rejoiced to see him so faithful to his vow, yet bewailed his determination not to return to the capital.

The merchants, the learned brahmins and the priests filled with wonder, and the weeping matrons, praised Bharata and unitedly entreated Rama to return.