Once upon a time, in a great battle, the powerful army of the demon king Ravana ran away!  Their leader had been defeated by the monkey army's brave fighters.

Ravana was very angry.  He was sad that his friend Prahasta had died.  He roared, "I will fight myself! I will destroy Rama and Lakshmana and their monkey army!"  He climbed onto his shiny chariot, pulled by strong horses.  Loud trumpets and drums cheered him on.  His army, big and strong like mountains, followed him.

Ravana's army was huge and scary. Rama, a brave prince, asked his friend Vibhishana, "Who are those strong leaders?"

Vibhishana pointed out the demon generals: Akampana, Indrajit, Atikaya, Mahodara, Trishiras, Kumbha, Nikumbha, and Narantaka. And the biggest, scariest of all—Ravana himself!

Rama said, "Ravana is so powerful! He is like the sun, too bright to look at! But today, I will defeat him! I will save Sita!"  Rama picked up his bow and arrow.

Ravana told his soldiers to guard the city. Then, he jumped into the monkey army like a giant fish into the ocean!

Sugriva, the monkey king, threw a giant rock at Ravana.  Ravana broke the rock with his arrows.  Then Ravana shot Sugriva, and the monkey fell down, hurt.

Other monkeys, like Gavaksha, Gavaya, Sushena, Rishabha, Jyotirmukha, and Nala, fought bravely, but Ravana was too strong. He hurt many monkeys.

Lakshmana, Rama's brother, wanted to fight Ravana. Rama said, "Go, brother! Be brave, but be careful!"

Lakshmana fought Ravana, but Ravana was very strong.  Then Hanuman, a super-strong monkey, jumped in!  He punched Ravana, and Ravana fell!

Ravana got back up and fought Nila, another strong monkey.  Nila was clever and jumped all over Ravana's chariot, making him dizzy!  But Ravana eventually hurt Nila with a magic arrow.

Then Ravana fought Lakshmana.  He hurt Lakshmana with a powerful spear! But Lakshmana was very strong, too!

Hanuman rushed to help. He hit Ravana so hard, Ravana fell again!

Ravana got up one more time and fought Rama.  Rama was so strong, he broke Ravana's chariot and hurt him badly!

Rama said, "Go back to your city, Ravana.  I will defeat you another day."  Ravana was defeated and ran back to his city, Lanka.

The monkeys cheered!  They had fought bravely, and even though many were hurt, they were happy that they had stood up to Ravana!  The battle wasn't over, but for now, the monkey army and Rama were victorious.
