That exalted one, Shri Bharata, truly obedient to the behests of his Guru, perceiving his army well lodged, proceeded on foot to meet Shri Rama. As soon as the army was encamped, he addressed Shatrughna in these words: “O Excellent One, you with your men and a few huntsmen, speedily search the forest and seek out Shri Rama’s hermitage. Let Guha attended by a thousand of his warriors, armed with bows, arrows and swords, search for Shri Rama in the forest. I, myself, in the company of the counsellors, citizens, elders and brahmins, will go on foot through the forest. I shall not rest till I have beheld the saintly Rama, the valiant Lakshmana and the most auspicious Sita. I shall not seek repose till I have looked on the shining countenance of Shri Rama, my elder brother. My mind will taste no peace till I have placed my forehead at the feet of Rama, that bear the marks of royalty. My soul will find no delight till I have placed Shri Rama on the ancestral throne and beheld him anointed with the holy water at the time of his coronation! Fortunate is Prince Lakshmana, who looks on the moon-like, lotus-eyed resplendent face of Rama, each day. Blessed is the daughter of King Janaka, who follows Shri Rama, the Lord of earth and ocean! Blessed also is Cittrakuta, equal to the Himalayas, on which Shri Rama dwells, as Kuvera and Cittraratha dwell in the forest. Blessed is this forest to-day, abounding in poisonous serpents and difficult to penetrate, because the mighty warrior Rama abides in it.”

Thus speaking, the valiant Prince Bharata entered the forest on foot. The chief of eloquent persons, the pious Bharata, reached the centre of the forest, where blossoming and fruitful trees adorned the mountain heights. Climbing a shala tree, he saw the smoke rising from the fire in Rama’s hermitage. The prince with his friends rejoiced like those who have crossed the ocean, to find the dwelling place of Rama. Finding that Shri Ramacandra dwelt on the mountain frequented by ascetics, Shri Bharata, leaving his army behind, in the company of Guha speedily started for the hermitage.