The great hero, the ever-cheerful Rama, together with Lakshmana having successfully assisted Shri Vishvamitra, passed the night in the hermitage.

At dawn, after purifying themselves, they approached Shri Vishvamitra and offered obeisance to him and the other sages. Bowing down before the great muni, who was as resplendent as a blazing fire, they addressed him in submissive tones, saying: “O Great Rishi, we are both your humble servants, what further commands are there for us? We are here to obey.”

The other rishis, led by Shri Vishvamitra, listened to the words of Shri Ramacandra and answered saying: “O Great One, the King of Mithila, the righteous Janaka is performing a holy sacrifice and we shall attend it. O Great Beings, be pleased to accompany us; there you will see a rare and wonderful bow. In ancient days this bow was given by the devas to Janaka, it is exceedingly heavy and splendid. Neither gandharvas nor asuras can bend this great bow, how much less man? To test their skill, great kings have come to the assembly of King Janaka, but none has succeeded in raising the bow and stringing it. O Illustrious One, let us go and see the sacrifice of the King of Mithila and also that marvellous bow. In former days, King Janaka performed a sacrifice and the fruit of it was the great bow which he obtained from the gods who instructed him saying: ‘Place this bow in the sacrificial chamber and let it be worshipped with incense, perfume and lights

Shri Vishvamitra having related these facts, started out accompanied by the two princes and other sages. Invoking the Vanadevata (Forest Deity) he said to him: “My sacrifice has come to a successful conclusion, may happiness be thine. I am leaving the Siddha-Ashrama for the banks of the sacred river Gunga on the slopes of the Himalayas, situated in the domain of King Janaka.”

Then the sage reverently circumambulated the hermitage and turned northwards. As Shri Vishvamitra entered upon his journey, the sages skilled in the knowledge of the science of Brahman, accompanied him with their chattels placed on hundreds of waggons. The birds and beasts of the hermitage also followed them for a long way until the holy muni requested them to turn back.

The sages and the holy muni reached the banks of the river Shona at sunset and, having bathed and recited their evening prayers, performed the fire sacrifice.

Shri Ramacandra and Prince Lakshmana then offered salutations to Shri Vishvamitra and the other rishis, and sat down before them. Thereafter Shri Rama cheerfully enquired: “O Lord, what country is this, covered with verdant groves? Be gracious enough to relate everything concerning it.”

The great ascetic of firm vows, was pleased to hear these words and, sitting amidst the sages, he described the country fully to them.