The rishis, having left the hermitage, Shri Rama reflected on the matter and judged it wisest not to dwell there longer.

Remembrance of his people, his mothers and Prince Bharata who had been united with him there, caused him unending distress. Further, the elephants and horses of Bharata’s army had defiled and laid waste the ground, rendering it squalid and foul. On mature reflection, he thought “We will depart hence” and taking Shri Sita and Lakshmana with him, he left that place.

Proceeding further, he came to the ashrama of the Sage Atri, and made obeisance to him, that holy one regarding him with a fatherly affection. He bestowed his favour likewise on Sita and Lakshmana and treated Rama with the hospitality due to him.

The virtuous Sage Atri, ever devoted to the good of all, summoned his aged and pious wife Anasuya, and respectfully asking her to be seated, addressed his worthy and excellent spouse. He said: “Shri Sita has visited our hermitage, do you take her with you and receive her hospitably.”

Then the Sage Atri said to Ramacandra: “Formerly when rain was withheld for a period of ten years and the earth dried up, this virtuous woman, Anasuya, by her great austerity, produced fruits and berries for the sages and caused the sacred Ganges to descend so that they might bathe therein; thus by her arduous ascetic practices, did she dispel the impediments in the path of the sages. O Sinless Rama, this is the same Anasuya, who at one time, to succour the sages, caused ten nights to be reduced to one. This Anasuya is to be highly revered for her age’s sake, and is the object of reverence of all beings. Do you permit the Princess Sita to accompany the meek and aged Anasuya. By her great and noble deeds, she has acquired immeasurable fame. Let Janaki attend her.”

Then Shri Ramacandra answered, “Be it so,” and the illustrious prince said to Sita: “O Princess, you have heard the words spoken by the sage; for thine own good do you wait on this aged ascetic.”

Thereafter, Shri Sita went with Anasuya who was proficient in every virtue. On account of her age, her physical form was feeble and emaciated, her hair grey, whilst her body trembled like a palm tree agitated by a strong wind.

Uttering her name, Shri Sita made obeisance to her, the gentle saint returning her salutation with great humility enquiring as to her welfare. The aged Anasuya, beholding Shri Sita offering humble obeisance, spoke encouraging words, saying:—

“O Sita, fortunate art you, that you are attentive to the duties owed to your consort. It is supremely auspicious that you, forsaking your people, your individual comfort, your wealth and your possessions should accompany your husband to the forest.

“She who is devoted to her spouse, whether in the city or the forest, regardless whether he be a sinner or virtuous, that woman attains the highest region. Whether a husband be cruel, or the slave of desires, or poor, a virtuous wife will continue to worship him as a god. O Princess, I have studied deeply and I do not think that a woman can have a better friend than her husband, for he, in all circumstances, protects her.

“O Princess of Videha, those evil women who, enslaved by desire, do not regard what should or should not be done, O Princess of Mithila, they, imprudently commit unworthy acts and becoming abhorrent, fall from virtue. But women such as you, acquainted with what is good or evil in the world, like pious men, attain heaven. O Sati, you have ever been faithful to your conjugal duty and through your virtuous acts, undertaken in conjunction with your husband, shalt attain merit and fame.”