Seeing the two brothers, the glory of the House of Raghu, being borne away, Sita, lifting up her arms, began to cry aloud, reflecting thus:—

‘Rama, the son of Dasaratha, who is truthful, virtuous and guileless, is being carried away by a demon of terrifying aspect; I shall become a prey to bears, tigers and panthers!’

Thinking thus, she cried out:—“O Foremost of Demons, I beg of you, take me and spare those two descendants of

Raghu!”

Hearing Vaidehi’s words, Rama and Lakshmana, full of valour, prepared to slay that wicked wretch, whereupon Saumitri broke the left arm of that redoubtable demon and Rama the right; thereafter, that titan, resembling a mass of cloud, his arms broken, growing weak, suddenly fell to the ground unconscious, like a mountain struck by lightning.

Then the two brothers beat the demon with their fists and feet and picking him up, again hurled him to the ground; yet, though struck by innumerable arrows and wounded by their swords, the demon did not die.

Perceiving it to be impossible to slay that giant, like unto a mountain, the blessed Rama, the refiige of all who are in peril, spoke thus:—

“By virtue of his penances, O Tiger among Men, this demon cannot be overcome in combat by weapons, let us therefore cast him into a pit. O Lakshmana, as if for a great elephant, do you dig a pit in the forest for this demon of formidable size.”

Having thus commanded Lakshmana saying:—“Dig a pit”, the valiant Rama stood with his foot on the neck of the demon.

Hearing those words, the demon in humble accents addressed that descendant of Raghu, that Bull among Men, saying:—

“O Lion among Heroes, under the blows of a warrior whose strength equals that of Indra, I am dying. In mine ignorance, I did not recognize you, O Lion amongst Men! I see now that you are the noble son of Kaushalya. O Dear Child, you are Rama and this is the fortunate Vaidehi and the illustrious Lakshmana.

“Through a curse, I had to assume the monstrous shape of a titan, but in reality I am the Gandharva Tumburu, who incurred the wrath of Kuvera. That glorious God, being propitiated by me, said:—‘When Rama, the son of Dasaratha, overcomes you in fight, then, assuming your natural form, you shalt return to the celestial region.’ Owing to my lack of reverence for him, in anger the Lord Kuvera had denounced me for having conceived an attachment for the nymph, Rambha. By your grace, I am delivered from this terrible curse and shall now return to mine abode. All hail to you, O Scourger of your Foes I

“O Dear Child, not far from here, at approximately four and half miles distance, dwells the virtuous Sharabhanga, a mine of austerity, a great and mighty rishi, effulgent as the sun. Go there, without delay; he will give you most excellent counsel!

Having buried me in a pit, O Rama, go your way in peace! Those demons who are about to die must according to a fixed law be buried in a pit.”

Having spoken thus to Kakutstha, the courageous Viradha, pierced by many arrows, leaving his body, ascended to heaven.

Then Raghava said to Lakshmana:—“Dig a pit for this demon of dreadful deeds, as for a great elephant in the forest.” Having spoken thus to Lakshmana saying ‘Dig a pit!’, Rama who was endowed with great prowess, remained standing with his foot on the head of Viradha.

Then Lakshmana, taking up a pick, dug a great pit by the side of the demon, whose ears resembled conches and threw him into it, he letting forth dreadful shrieks the while.

Finding they were unable to kill that great titan with their sharp weapons, those two lions among men, having employed all their ingenuity, put an end to Viradha by burying him in the pit.

Viradha himself, a ranger of the forest, desiring to die at Rama’s hands, had indicated to him how he should proceed, saying:—•“I cannot be slain by weapons.”

Hearing this, the idea had come to Rama to fling him into a pit, and while being cast into it, that all-powerful demon caused the forest to resound with his cries.

Having thrown Viradha into the pit, Rama and Lakshmana, their fears removed, rejoiced in that forest, like the sun and moon in the firmament.