The wise Rishyasringa, versed in the Scriptures, meditated for a while and then spoke to King Dasaratha saying:—

“O King, I will perform the sacrifice Puttatresti, spoken of in the Atharva Veda, which will assist you in your endeavour to obtain a son.”

Then the sage inaugurated the sacrifice and poured oblations into the sacred fire accompanied by the chant of Vedic mantras.

The celestial beings, gandharvas, siddhas and sages assembled to obtain their portion of the sacrifice. After the sacrifice, they all approached Shri Brahma, the Lord of mankind and with joined palms addressed him:—

They said: “O Blessed Lord, having been favoured by you, the Asura Ravana, perpetually troubles us who are helpless, since you have granted great boons to him and we are forced to bear his fearful oppression.

“This Lord of Rakshasas has persecuted the three worlds and having overthrown the guardians of the earth, he has even humbled Indra himself. Provoking the sages, contemplatives, brahmins and the gods, he even controls the sun’s rays and the wind’s power, even the ocean in his presence is still. At his approach, O Blessed Lord, we are terrified. O Giver of Boons, be pleased to bring about his destruction.”

Hearing these words, Brahma reflected for a while and answered: “I have devised a plan for slaying this wicked tyrant. It was granted to Ravana that no gandharva, yaksha or deva should be able to slay him, but thinking man to be of no account, he did not ask to be made invulnerable in regard to him; therefore, none but man can destroy him.”

These words, uttered by Shri Brahma filled the celestial and other beings with joy.

At this time the immortal Vishnu, with conch, disc and mace, the Overlord of the whole world, clad in a yellow robe, appeared at that place. Adored by the gods, he drew near and took his seat by Shri Brahma, then all the gods addressed him saying:—

“O Madhusudana, for the good of all beings, we entreat You, to be born as heir to the supremely righteous, charitable and illustrious Sage Dasaratha. Appear, O Lord, in the form of four sons to the three consorts of that great king. Descending into a human body, do you slay Ravana, the scourge of the universe, whom we are unable to destroy. That ignorant Ravana, by his power, afflicts the devas, siddhas and sages. O Lord, that wicked asura, sporting in the garden of Indra, has slain countless nymphs and gandharvas. In company with the sages, we approach You so that we may be released from this oppression. We take refuge in You, You are our only asylum! O Lord, we beseech You to take birth as man in order to destroy the enemy of men and gods.”

Thus did the gods appeal to Shri Vishnu and He, adored by the world, answered them who had taken refuge in Him:—

“O Devas, fear no more, peace be with you. For your sake, I will destroy Ravana, together with his sons, grandsons, counsellors, friends and relatives. Having slain that cruel and wicked asura, the cause of fear to the divine sages, I will rule in the world of mortals for eleven thousand years.”

Thus did Shri Vishnu grant a boon to the gods, and then reflected as to where on the earth he should take birth as man.

Then the lotus-eyed Lord resolved to become incarnate as the four sons of King Dasaratha.

The celestial sages, the heavenly musicians and the nymphs praised the Lord saying: “O Universal Sovereign, destroy the wicked asura, who is arrogant, powerful and vain, the enemy of Indra and the scourge of the ascetics and pious men, one who strikes terror into every heart, causing universal lamentation.

“Destroy, O Lord, this mighty being, together with his army, generals, relatives, friends and followers, remove the cause of the world’s woe and then return to your perfect abode.”