To those who with joined palms were making this petition, King Dasaratha answered courteously:—

“To-day, indeed, I am happy and fortunate since the people desire my son, Shri Rama, to be proclaimed regent.”

Thus, in the presence of his subjects, the king in gracious accents addressed Shri Vasishtha, Vamadeva and other sages:—

“In this month of Citra, when the woods are beautiful with flowering trees, be pleased, O Holy Ones, to prepare all things for the installation of my son as heir-apparent.”

After the king had spoken, the people applauded, and when the shouts of acclamation had died away, the monarch addressed the mighty Sage Vasishtha, saying: “O Blessed Lord, it is meet that you shouldest order those things needful for the coronation ceremony.”

Then Shri Vasishtha commanded the ministers in attendance to provide gold, gems, unguents, garlands of white flowers, parched rice, honey and clarified butter in separate vessels, also new cloths, chariots, weapons of all kinds, a complete army, elephants free from any imperfection, white flags, a white canopy, camaras, a hundred vessels of gold shining like fire, bulls with gilded horns, lion skins and other requisites.

Then the Sage Vasishtha commanded them, saying: “Place all these in the king’s sacred pavilion. Let every gate in the capital and the private apartments of the palace be decorated with garlands and sandalwood, and let fragrant incense be kindled everywhere.

“O You Accomplished Ministers, provide sweet and healthgivingfoods, milks and curds in attractive dishes sufficient to feed a hundred thousand brahmins. To-morrow the holy brahmins should be respectfully served with butter, curdled milk and parched rice, and presented with as much dakshina as will preserve them from want for the remainder of their lives.

“To-morrow, early in the morning, the Peace Chant should be recited, therefore, let the holy brahmins be invited and their seats prepared. Let banners and arches of flowers be displayed everywhere, and the roads sprinkled with water. Let beautifully attired singing girls with their attendants wait at the gates of the palace; let food and cooling drinks be provided at all the principal crossroads, also gifts of money and ritual objects that are considered sacred; let fruit and flowers be sent separately; let armed warriors clothed in clean raiment and armed with scimitars, wait in the courtyard of the king.”

In this manner, Shri Vasishtha and Shri Vamadeva performed all that had been required by the king and, everything being carried out to their satisfaction, they informed the great monarch accordingly. Then the illustrious sovereign said to the prime minister Sumantra: “Let the accomplished Prince Rama be brought here with all speed.” Acquiescing in the royal command, Sumantra brought thither in a royal chariot that great warrior, Shri Rama. Surrounded by the rulers of the earth, the east, the west, the north and the south, the kings of aryan and non-aryan descent and those from the forests and the hills, King Dasaratha looked like Indra in the midst of the gods.

He beheld his son Shri Ramacandra, handsome, valorous, of mighty length of arm, fearless, walking like an intoxicated elephant, his countenance resembling the moon, fair to look upon, captivating the hearts of all by his virtue and generosity, refreshing his subjects as clouds refresh those afflicted with the heat.

The monarch could not gaze sufficiently on his beloved son as he, attended by Sumantra who followed him with reverence, alighted frqm his chariot and ascended the steps of the royal palace which resembled Mount Kailasha. Approaching the king he announced his name and made profound obeisance at his feet.

Seeing the prince standing respectfully at his side, the king embraced him and asked him to occupy the golden throne set with jewels and gold. Raghava thus seated looked like the sun rising on the Sumeru mountain. The whole assembly was illumined by the presence of Shri Rama who resembled the moon riding in the autumn sky filled with innumerable stars.

As a man adorned with many ornaments is overjoyed with delight to see his own image reflected in a mirror, so was King Dasaratha filled with ineffable delight when beholding the glory of his son; and like Kashyapa addressing Indra, the mighty sovereign smilingly spoke to Rama:—

“O My Son, you are the offspring of my chief queen and do resemble her, you are exceedingly dear to me, endowed as you are with all the great attributes, you have imbued your people with your noble qualities; accept therefore the high office of regent. Notwithstanding, My Son, that you are by nature endowed with all good qualities and art humble, yet hear while I tell you that which is for your good.

“Keep far from you those evil habits born of love, pleasure and anger; through your secret service acquaint thyself closely with all the happenings of your kingdom and other domains, as though they took place before thine eyes. Give pleasure to your people by filling the various storehouses and arsenals. O Prince, that sovereign who rules his subjects with due regard to their happiness causes his friends to rejoice like the gods who have drunk the nectar of immortality. Wherefore, O my Child, conduct thyself with a mind fully subdued.”

Then, the friends of Rama acquainted Queen Kaushalya of the king’s resolve and she rewarded the messengers of these good tidings with many cows and gems.

Shri Rama, hearing the king’s words, answered: “So be it,” and, bowing to the great monarch, left the palace in his chariot, the people greeting him with joy as he passed by.

Satisfied with the sovereign’s decree, they acclaimed him with salutations and returning to their homes worshipped their gods, propitiating them so that no impediment should arise in the installation of Shri Rama as regent.