The following day, King Janaka, having carried out the sacrifice with the assistance of the priests, said to Shri Shatananda:—

“My younger brother, the virtuous and mighty Kushadvaja, resides in the city of Sankamshya, which is surrounded by a moat and battlements, mounted by heavy batteries, the river Ikshu flowing at its side, and resembles the aerial chariot Pushpaka. I desire to see that Excellent One, who, with liberality, has assisted me in the act of sacrifice; it is meet that he should attend the marriage ceremony.”

Having spoken thus to Shri Shatananda, certain attendants standing near, were commanded by the king to set out thither. At his command, the messengers, like gods riding out on the behest of Indra, went forth on swift horses to bring back the royal guest.

Arriving at Sankamshya, and being received by the King Kushadvaja, they acquainted him with King Janaka’s proposal. The great king acquiescing to his request, came to the capital of the sovereign of Mithila and beholding the virtuous great-souled Janaka, together with Shri Shatananda, bowed down to them in salutation.

Having occupied a royal seat in the assembly, the two illustrious brothers commanded their chief minister, Sudamana, saying: “O Chief of Counsellors, speedily approach the great sovereign, Dasaratha, of limitless glory, and bring that Excellent One to my court, together with the two princes and his ministers.”

Sudamana, going to the encampment of King Dasaratha, and bowing down to him, said: “O Great Hero, O Lord of Ayodhya, the sovereign of Mithila humbly invites you with your spiritual preceptor, your priests and your two sons to his assembly.”

Then King Dasaratha attended by his friends and kinsmen came to the place where King Janaka sat amidst the sages and ministers. And he, the wise and eloquent monarch addressed King Janaka, saying: “O Great King, it is known to you that the chief priest of the House of Ikshvaku is Shri Vasishtha and my spokesman in all matters. Therefore, with the approval of Shri Vishvamitra he will relate the descent of our dynasty to you.”

Having spoken, Dasaratha became silent and Shri Vasishtha then addressed King Janaka and Shri Shatananda:—

“From Brahman, the Unmanifest, the Eternal and Imperishable Brahma came forth. From him was produced Marica, Marica begot Kashyapa; Kashyapa begot Surya, Surya begot Vivasvat, and Vivasvat begot Manu. Manu was the father of Ikswaku who was the first king of Ayodhya. The son of Ikswaku was Kukshi and his son was Vikukshi; the illustrious Vana was the son of Vikukshi and Vana’s son was the mighty Anranya; his son was Prithu and the son of Prithu was Trishanku; the great Dhundhumara was the son of Trishanku and his son was the hero Yuvanashva. The renowned Mandhata was born of Yuvanashva and Mandhata’s son was named Susandhi. Susandhi had two sons Dhruvasandhi and Prasenajit. Bharata was the son of Dhruvasandhi and the renowned Asit was the son of Bharata. The three sons of Asit were Hihaxas [?], Talajanghas and Shashavindus, great Kings, who, hostile to their sire, waged war against him and sent him into exile. Then King Asit, with his two consorts, going to the Himalayas, there laid down his life, leaving the queens pregnant, whereat one of them, to destroy the fruit of the other’s womb, gave her poison.

“At that time, a sage of the family of Bhrigu dwelt on the heights of Himalaya, by name Cyavana practising penance there. Then the lotus-eyed Queen Kalindi, desirous of bearing an excellent son approached the sage who resembled a god and bowed before him.

The brahmin addressed the queen saying:

‘O Fortunate One, you bearest in your womb, a hero, soon to be born together with the poison; have no anxiety.’

“The queen, faithful to her deceased lord, overcome with sorrow, fearing the death of her child, paid homage to the muni. Thereafter she bore a son, born with the poison administered by the other wife and he was named Sagara.

“The son of Sagara was Asumanjas, and his son was Amshuman. The son of Amshuman was Dilipa, and Dilipa’s son was Bhagiratha. The son of Bhagiratha was Kakustha and his son was Raghu. The son of Raghu, Prabradha became a demon, and was subsequently called Kalamashapada and his son was Shangana. The son of Shangana was Sudarshana, and his son was Agnivarna. Shighraga was the son of Agnivarna and the son of Shighraga was Manu. Manu’s son was Prashushruka and his son was Ambarisha. Ambarisha’s son was named Nahusha and his son was Yayati. The son of Yayati was Nabhaga.

“The son of Nabhaga was Aja, and the son of Aja was King Dasaratha; the two sons of King Dasaratha are Rama and Lakshmana.

“O King, I have recounted the genealogy of King Ikswaku to you. All these kings were noble, virtuous and distinguished in their love of truth.

“King Dasaratha requests the hands of your daughters in marriage for his two sons, who are in every way worthy to be your kinsmen. O Chief of Men, bestow your daughters on them.”