Seeing the hermitage and the hut deserted, with the grassy seats strewn here and there and not finding Vaidehi anywhere, Rama, the son of Dararatha, lifting up his beautiful arms, uttered these sorrowful words:—

“O Lakshmana, where is Vaidehi, where has she gone? O Saumitri, who has carried away or devoured my dearest one? O Sita, if you have concealed thyself behind a tree and art mocking me, then bring this jest to an end; you have enjoyed my distress long enough 1 O Darling, the young gazelles with whom you didst play, languish in thine absence, their eyes filled with tears. Without Sita I cannot live, O Lakshmana, I am overwhelmed with grief on account of her abduction. To-day I shall rejoin that great monarch, my sire, in the other world, who will reproach me, saying: ‘How comes it that you, having left me in order to redeem my vow, art come hither before the appointed time? O Slave of your desires, you are bereft of honour and loyalty, woe unto you!’

“Without doubt, thus will my father address me in the other region! O Cruel One 1 distracted as I am and overwhelmed with sorrow, you have deserted me, as a fair name parts company with a swindler I O Lovely Princess, do not leave me! O Slender-waisted Lady, in the abyss in which you have plunged me, I shall yield up my life 1”

Thus did Rama lament, desiring to behold Sita once more, but the unfortunate Raghava could not see the daughter of Janaka anywhere. Sunk in misery on account of Sita, he resembled a mighty elephant trapped in marshy ground in which it has set foot.

Then Lakshmana in his ardent desire to console him said:—

“O Hero, O Mine of Wisdom, do not grieve! Let us unitedly put forth our endeavours. This hill is famed for its many caves, and Maithili, who, enamoured of the woods often wandered in these thickets, has doubtless ventured into the deep forest or visited the lake covered with lotuses in bloom or she has gone to the river filled with fish and frequented by birds of beautiful plumage. Perchance she has hidden herself in the gorge to frighten us and to see if we will search her out. O Lion among Men, let us seek her without delay! O Fortunate Prince, if you deemest her to be somewhere in the forest, we will leave no quarter unexplored; do not grieve, O Kakutstha!”

These words of Lakshmana, inspired by fraternal affection, comforted Rama, who with Saumitri began to search for Sita once more with a tranquil heart. But ranging the woods, hills, rivers and lakes on every side, searching the plateaus, caves and summits of the mountain, those two sons of Dasaratha could not find Sita anywhere, and having sought her in every part of that mountain Rama said to Lakshmana:—

“I see no trace of the lovely Vaidehi on this mountain, O Saumitri!”

Then Lakshmana in great distress addressed his brother, who was endowed with flaming energy, saying:—•“It is by ranging the Dandaka Forest that you will be re-united with Maithili, the daughter of Janaka, O Sagacious One, as Vishnu covered the earth on subduing Bali.”

Being thus addressed by the valiant Lakshmana, Raghava, whose heart was heavy with sorrow, answered in piteous accents, saying:—

“The whole forest has been searched with care by us and the lakes where the lotus blooms and this mountain with its many caves and waterfalls also, O Prudent Prince, yet no trace of Vaidehi who is dearer to me than my life’s breath can I find.”

Thus mourning, Rama, overcome by anxiety, his heart contracted with grief, in an excess of anguish, swooned away. Trembling in every limb, his mind bewildered, stunned and broken, that unhappy prince heaving deep and burning sighs, in a voice strangled with sobs, cried out: “O Sita, O My Beloved!”

Thereupon Lakshmana, distracted with anxiety, sought to console his dear brother by every means, standing before him with joined palms.

But Rama gave no heed to the words that fell from Lakshmana’s lips and, not beholding his dear Sita, continued to call upon her again and again.