“O Ramacandra, perceiving that a long period had elapsed since the departure of his sons, King Sagara spoke to his powerful and resplendent grandson Amshuman:

“‘O Child, you are valiant, learned and illustrious like thine ancestors, go and seek thine uncles and the stealer of the horse also. The interior of the earth is inhabited by the most mighty beings, arm thyself therefore with sword, bow and arrows. Pay reverence to those worthy to be worshipped whom you dost encounter on the way and make obeisance to them; slay those who obstruct your purpose, then successful, return and ensure the completion of the sacrifice.’

“Thus instructed by his grandfather, Prince Amshuman, arming himself with sword, bow and arrows, speedily departed. Honoured on the way by devas, danavas, asuras and nagas, pisachas, birds and serpents, he came to the mighty and resplendent elephant and worshipped him, enquiring as to his welfare.

The elephant said in reply:

‘O Prince Amshuman, you will accomplish your purpose and soon return to the capital.’

“The prince proceeded further and enquired in the same manner of each of the other great elephants. They all advised the prince, who had paid due respect to them, to proceed further. As instructed by them, Amshuman came to the place where the heaped ashes of his uncles’ bodies were lying. Overcome with grief, Amshuman wept to see that death had overtaken them. Afflicted with distress and pain, he suddenly perceived the sacrificial horse grazing near by. Desirous of offering the rite of water for his departed relatives, he looked round but could find no water anywhere.

Extending his gaze, he saw his maternal uncle, the holy eagle, who addressed the prince as follows:—

“‘O Lion among men, grieve not, these princes have met the death they deserved. They have been consumed to ashes by the Mahatma Kapila of unimaginable glory. O Wise One, it is not meet to offer the usual rites for them. O Great One, perform the rites with the water of the holy river Ganga, the Daughter of Himalaya. When the waters of the purifier of the world, the sacred Ganga flow over their ashes, the ceremony will be crowned with success and the sixty thousand princes will be received into heaven’.”

The illustrious and mighty Prince Amshuman listened to the words of Shri Garuda and speedily returning with the horse, approached King Sagara, who still awaited the completion of the initiatory rites; he related to him all that the eagle had said. The monarch completed the sacrifice and returned to his capital considering the means whereby he might cause Shri Ganga to descend to earth; but in vain.

King Sagara, unable to devise any way to accomplish this matter, having ruled for thirty thousand years, departed hence.