Having intercepted and shattered that great mace with his arrows, the ever virtuous Rama, though still wrath, spoke as if in jest:—

“O Titan, is this the extent of your power? How strange that one so deficient in prowess should boast so loudly! Severed by my shafts, behold your mace lies in pieces on the earth! You have bragged to no purpose! Didst you not declare: ‘I will wipe away the tears shed for the death of the titans’? Vain words! As Garuda of old stole the nectar of immortality, I am about to deprive you of your life, you vile and lying wretch I The earth this day will quaff the foaming blood issuing from your throat, which my shafts have severed. Soon shall your body, covered with dust, the arms extended, embrace the earth, as a frenzied lover embraces the woman he has won, after long delay.

“O Obloquy of Your Race, on your death the Dandaka Forest will become a refuge for those who are themselves a refuge; my shafts will rid the forest of all titans and the ascetics will wander about there without fear. To-day the titan women in sore distress, weeping and terrified, will fly this place. They who inspired terror in others, having evil-doers such as you as their consorts, shall to-day taste the pangs of sorrow! O crud, fallen and false-hearted Wretch, in fear of whom the sages, tremble as they pour forth their oblations into the sacred fire.”

As Raghava, swayed by anger, uttered these words, Khara, foaming with rage, began to hurl abuses at him, saying:—

“Verily, despite your boasting you are filled with terror and in the face of death dost not know whether to speak or to be silent. Those about to die lose the power of their five senses and no longer know what is right and wrong.”

Having spoken thus, that Ranger of the Night, Khara, scowling, looked round him for a weapon and, perceiving a great palm tree near at hand, forcibly uprooted it and whirling it with terrific energy hurled it at Rama, roaring: “Now you are slain!”

Thereupon, Raghava with his weapon cut that tree to pieces and in an access of rage resolved to slay Khara. His body covered with sweat, his eyes inflamed, he pierced Khara with innumerable darts, so that rivers of blood gushed from his wounds, as do the torrents from the mountain Prasravana.

Stupefied by Rama’s arrows and maddened by the smell of blood, Khara rushed at Rama, who, seeing him approach full of fury and covered with gore, retreated a few paces; then, in order to slay him, he selected an arrow that shone like fire, resembling the Rod of Brahma. And that righteous One discharged that shaft at Khara, which had been conferred on the Sage Agastya by Indra, and like a thunderbolt it struck his breast so that he, consumed by the flame issuing therefrom, fell to the ground. As Rudra with his third eye consumed the demon Andhaka in the forest of Sveta, as Vritra was slain by the thunderbolt, as Namuchi by the foam, as Bal by Indra’s mace, so did Khara fall.

Then the Gods and the Caranas assembled and, amazed and delighted, struck their drums, showering flowers on Rama and saying:—“In this great conflict Raghava, by means of his pointed shafts, has in an instant slain fourteen thousand demons, able to change their shape at will, with their generals, Khara and Dushana. Great indeed is this exploit of Rama, versed in the science of the Self. What valour! His prowess resembles that of Vishnu himself!”

Saying this, the Gods returned from whence they had come.

Thereafter the Rajarishis and Paramarishis, accompanied by Agastya, joyfully paid homage to Rama and said:—

“It was for this that the Slayer of Paka, the mighty Purandara, visited the hermitage of the Sage Sharabhanga. It was for this that the great Rishis brought you to this place, O Prince, that you mightest compass the destruction of the titans of evil deeds. You have fulfilled your mission amongst us, O Son of Dasaratha; from to-day the virtuous sages may perform their devotions in the Dandaka Forest in peace.”

Then that hero, Lakshmana, accompanied by Sita, issued from the mountain cavern and joyfully entered the hermitage, and the victorious and heroic Rama, honoured by the great Sages, returned to the ashrama, where Lakshmana paid him obeisance.

Seeing her consort returning victorious, having brought felicity to the ascetics, the happy Vaidehi embraced him. Beholding those hosts of demons slain, and that Destroyer of Enemy Hosts worshipped by the magnanimous sages, the daughter of Janaka began to minister to her lord and full of joy, embracing him afresh in her delight, experienced supreme happiness.