In ringing tones, King Dasaratha addressed the leaders of the people seated before him, uttering words delighting their hearts.

When the aged monarch began to speak, his words resembled the beat of drums, or the crashing of thunder, yet they were filled with great sweetness withal and uttered in the manner of a king. He said: “It is well known to you that this vast empire was upheld by my predecessors and their fathers before them. To promote the prosperity and felicity of the kingdom, formerly protected by the Kings of Ikshvaku, I, walking in the path trodden by my forbears, have preserved it to the utmost. Having passed sixty thousand years under the royal canopy, my body has become old and feeble and seeks repose. The burdens of state, not able to be sustained by those of uncontrolled mind, have I borne, and now am weary. To-day, therefore, with the approval of the learned brahmins present here and for the good of my people, I desire to surrender the dominion to the protection of my eldest son. Possessing every essential virtue, Shri Ramacandra, my beloved son, equal to Indra in prowess and the conqueror of his foes, excelling in every virtue, resembles the moon accompanied by the Pushya star.

“I desire to install as regent, Rama, exalted among men, elder brother of Lakshmana, worthy to be your protector. In truth, I verily believe that not only the earth, but the three worlds will regard him as their lord. Desiring the joy of the universe, I shall lay upon him the weight of government and thus be freed from anxiety concerning the kingdom.

“If this seems proper to you, give me your counsel or say what should otherwise be done. Though this be my decree, yet should you judge aught else to be a better way, then speak that I may know of it. The best course is well known to be determined after careful deliberation.”

Hearing the words of King Dasaratha, the other monarchs and elders cried in unison, “Excellent, Excellent!” Upon this, a sound like distant thunder, pleasant to hear, or like the cry of peacocks delighting in the storm, arose. Thereafter, the purpose of the sovereign being communicated to all, acclamations burst forth that shook the foundations of the palace.

Then the learned brahmins, the ministers, kings and the elders of the city assembled for consultation with those who had come from afar, and being of one mind, after due deliberation, thus addressed the king:—

“O Mighty Sovereign, you have ruled for thousands of years and have now become old, do you, therefore, appoint Rama as regent. It is our cherished desire that the glorious Prince Rama should be seen by us, riding on an elephant beneath the royal canopy.”

The king, wishing to fathom their true motives, replied with candour, saying: “Acting on my suggestion, you have all expressed your willingness to see Rama appointed regent, yet there is still some uncertainty in my mind; tell me frankly why you desire to see Rama crowned. Have I erred? Have I failed to govern righteously?”

Then the elders of the people and the counsellors answered the sagacious sovereign Dasaratha in this wise: “O King, your son is endowed with excellent attributes. Hear of the divine and amiable qualities of the wise and perfect Ramacandra, qualities endearing him to all and pleasing to record.

“In his love and zeal for truth, he is equal to Indra. You, O King, art exalted above all in the House of Ikshvaku, yet none in the world practises righteousness as does Shri Rama.

“By his conduct, he has added lustre to virtue and prosperity. Diffusing happiness among his people, he resembles the moon delighting the earth. In forbearance, he is like the earth, in wisdom like Brihaspati, in valour like Indra. With a deep regard for truth, free from envy and jealousy, his disposition is excellent.

“Forgiving every injury, a comforter of the afflicted and the distressed, he addresses all with gentleness. Acknowledging every favour received in full measure, self-controlled, true to his word whatever betide, speaking no ill of others, of candid utterance, full of wisdom he ever reveres the aged.

“Of immeasurable renown, Shri Rama, whose glory and splendour constantly increase, who in the science of archery is superior even to the gods, asuras and men, who has studied all the branches of learning and the Veda, is also unequalled in the art of music. The abode of peace and prosperity, ever courteous, humble and wise, and who, having received the highest instruction from the brahmins, is skilful in expounding the meaning of the Veda.

“When in company with Lakshmana, he goes to the attack, storming towns and villages, he never withdraws without wholly defeating the enemy. Returning triumphant, he enquires after the welfare of his subjects as if they were his own sons, and gives special thought to the well-being of women, servants and his disciples as a father regards the needs of his family.

“O Sire, Shri Rama graciously enquires respecting our own disciples whether they render us proper service and hospitality and further discharge their duties faithfully.

“He suffers with the afflicted and rejoices like a parent when his people hold a festival. That mighty archer, the observer of truth, the servant of the aged, who blesses all those who seek his protection, is wholly righteous. Performing noble deeds, he will not hear or utter words that create discord. Possessing a charming brow and large eyes, in this resembling Vishnu himself, Rama, by the process of deduction, is able to converse with eloquence. By his courage, prowess, self-reliance and patience, he has become the delight of his people.

“Ever ready to serve his subjects, scorning sensual pleasures, he is able to rule the three worlds, how much more this tiny earth?

“His joy and anger are never excited without cause. He destroys those meriting death, but shows mercy to the innocent.

“Liberal to those who have found favour with him; willing to suffer in the exercise of self-control; beloved of his subjects, he evokes devotion in every virtuous heart.

“Brilliant as the moon by reason of his excellent attributes, the earth claims him as her lord.

“O King, you are fortunate in possessing this great son who resembles Kashyapa, the son of Marichi. The people of Ayodhya and the citizens of the kingdom of Koshala continually pray for Rama’s life and well-being.

“Men, women, the aged and those from far and near, at dawn and eventide, unitedly pray to all the gods that Shri Rama may ever be attended by prosperity. O Great King, graciously accede to our request. O Giver of boons, we beg you to install Shri Rama as regent without delay. Your son, resembling Shri Vishnu himself, is benevolent and generous to all. O King, do this with a cheerful mind.”