For some time the king lay insensible, then regaining consciousness he said: “My lotus-eyed Rama is but fifteen years old, I cannot believe he is capable of contending with the rakshasas. I possess a large and well-equipped army and will myself lead it against the demons. My seasoned warriors, who are courageous and skilled in bearing weapons and who are suitably remunerated by me, are fit to fight the rakshasas in battle; therefore, do not ask for Rama. I myself, bearing my bow and arrows, will lead the army in the field and fight to my last breath. With this protection, your sacrifice will come to a successful conclusion. I will go thither in person, do not take away Shri Ramacandra. Shri Rama is still a child without military experience, he cannot estimate the strength or weakness of the enemy, he has not yet acquired proficiency in warfare.

“You knowest well, O Sage, how crafty are the rakshasas in combat. Shri Ramacandra is not capable of opposing them successfully. I cannot bear the thought of Ramacandra contending with them. O Sage, I shall not five, even for a moment, if Shri Rama be separated from me, therefore, I entreat you, do not ask for him. Should’st you insist on Rama accompanying you, then take my forces also with you. O August Vishvamitra, recollect I pray you that I am now nine thousand years old and have begotten these sons with great difficulty. These princes are dearer to me than life itself and Shri Ramacandra is the dearest of them all. Excelling in virtue, he is my eldest son, therefore, do not take him from me. O Great Sage, how powerful are these rakshasas? Who are their supporters and how dost you imagine Shri Rama can destroy them? O Blessed Lord, say if you deemest that I and my army may successfully oppose those rakshasas who are skilled in magic?”

Shri Vishvamitra answered: “O King, Ravana, born of the great family of Paulastya, having been favoured by Brahma with a boon, is oppressing the three worlds. He is exceedingly powerful and supported by many asuric followers. It is said that this great warrior Ravana is the King of Asuras. He is the brother of Kuvera and the son of the Sage Vishravas. He does not obstruct the lesser sacrifices in person, but two mighty rakshasas named Marica and Suvahu, prompted by him, disrupt the sacrificial rites.”

The king listened to the muni’s words and then spoke: “I am not able to oppose that evil-souled asura. O Knower of the Law of Righteousness, I am but a wretched man and you are worthy of my worship; you are verily a god and also my spiritual preceptor. Since the gods, the danavas, gand-harvas, yakshas, birds and snakes cannot destroy Ravana, how can man do so? In battle, Ravana is able to defeat the mightiest warriors, it is certain therefore, that neither I nor my army can*ontend with him. How can I then send my son, beautiful as a god, but inexperienced in war, to oppose Ravana? O Sage, I will not let my young child go. Lavana, the son of Madhu is among those who destroy the sacrifice. I will not give up my son. The sons of Sunda and Upasunda, Marica and Suvahu, who resemble death itself in battle, are among those who impede the sacrifice. They are skilful and seasoned warriors, I dare not send my young son against them. Whoever you chooses, friends, relatives or even I myself will accompany you to engage in the fight.”

On hearing the king’s injudicious words, the holy sage was enraged. As an oblation poured into the fire adds to the fierceness of the flame, so did the words of King Dasaratha add to the fire of anger kindled in the sage’s heart.