Beholding the hermitage, the mighty Vishvamitra filled with joy, bowed with great humility to Shri Vasishtha who was engaged in the telling of his rosary.

Shri Vasishtha welcomed the king and bade him be seated, and he having done so was offered the fruits and roots that grew in that place.

Honoured by the holy sage, King Vishvamitra enquired of him if all were well with the fire sacrifice, his spiritual practices and his disciples. Shri Vasishtha related to him all that concerned his welfare and the welfare of those in the hermitage, even to the trees themselves.

Sitting at ease, Shri Vasishtha said to King Vishvamitra, eminent among yogis and a son of Shri Brahma himself: “O King, is it well with you in all ways? Dost you give satisfaction to your subjects in accordance with the law of righteousness and dost you rule and protect your people according to the spiritual law? Is your revenue justly received and increased? Is it judiciously administered and distributed to those who are eligible and deserving? Are your servants remunerated at the proper season? Do your subjects willingly obey you? O Sovereign, hast you subdued thine enemies? O Sinless King, is it well with thine army, your treasury, your friends, your sons and grandsons?”

In reply to these questions, King Vishvamitra humbly answered: “All is well, my Lord!”

Conversing pleasantly together for a long time, recounting the ancient traditions to each other, they thus promoted their mutual delight.

O Prince of the House of Raghu, when King Vishvamitra paused, Shri Vasishtha said to him smilingly: “O King, although you have with you a large retinue, yet it is my desire to offer you hospitality, together with thine army. Be pleased to accept it. Since you are a distinguished guest, it is meet that I should do all within my power to entertain you, therefore, be gracious enough to receive the little I have to offer.”

King Vishvamitra answered: “O Lord, your gentle and pleasing words are sufficient entertainment. Moreover, you have already presented me with fruits and the clear water of your hermitage. By meeting with you alone, am I sufficiently honoured. O Supremely Wise One, it was proper that I should offer obeisance to you; now you have entertained me, allow me to offer you salutations and depart.”

The great sage declined to accept the king’s refusal of his offer, and still insisted that he should entertain him.

Then Vishvamitra said: “Be it according to your pleasure, my Lord, I will do as you desirest.”

At these words, Shri Vasishtha sent for his favourite spotted cow Kamadhenu and said to her: “O Shabala, draw near and listen to me, I desire to offer hospitality to the king and his army. O Dear One, you are the wish-fulfilling cow and can accomplish anything, therefore, now prepare splendid dishes which will be pleasing to them, of the six kinds of taste.1 Produce speedily whatever food can be eaten, drunk, licked or sucked.”