The wise Bharata beheld the royal assembly presided over by the great Vasishtha and other venerable sages, resembling the night made glorious by the full moon. Illumined by these excellent ones, who occupied their seats, attired in splendid apparel, the conclave was of incomparable brilliance. The assembly of learned men resembled the beauty of the full moon on a winter’s night.

The virtuous priest, Shri Vasishtha, beholding all the ministers and the chief counsellors, gently addressed Bharata, saying: “O Child, King Dasaratha, having practised virtue in his life, has bequeathed this rich and prosperous land to you. Shri Ramacandra observing the vow of truth, in obedience to his father and in conformity with the duty incumbent on him, to vindicate his parents, has not failed to accomplish his father’s command, as the moon does not abstain from shedding abroad its radiance. Now enjoy the possession of this peaceful kingdom given to you by your father and brother! To please your counsellors, cause thyself to be installed. The kings of the north, south and west, the peers and titular sovereigns of the western boundary and the monarchs of many islands, will bring you countless gems as offerings.”

Hearing the words of his spiritual preceptor, Prince Bharata was distressed, knowing well that according to the ancient tradition of his dynasty, the eldest son inherits the kingdom. Calling Rama to remembrance, Shri Bharata resolved to seek out his elder brother. The throat of the youthful prince was choked and in tones resembling the cry of the swan, he plaintively reproached the venerable Guru for the impropriety of his command.

Bharata said: “O Holy Lord, how can I usurp the legitimate possession of one, who, learned in the Vedas and sciences, acquired by dwelling as a servant in the house of his Guru, knows their meaning well and follows them in practice? How can one, born of King Dasaratha, striving to fulfil the law of dharma, take possession of the kingdom of Rama? Not only does the kingdom belong to Rama, but I also belong to him. O Holy One, may your counsels accord with righteousness j King Dasaratha owned this kingdom as did King Dilipa and Nahusha before him, so should the virtuous Prince Rama, the eldest and most excellent son, inherit the kingdom!

“If, as instructed by you, I accept it, it would be a great sin and worthy of an evil-doer, not in accordance with the way that leads to heaven and I should be adjudged the destroyer of the House of Ikshvaku. I abhor the wrong committed by my mother, and I offer salutations to Rama residing in the forest; I will follow him, he alone is king and worthy of ruling the three worlds! It were easy for him to administer this kingdom.”

All seated in the assembly, devoted to Rama, having listened to the righteous words of Bharata, shed tears of joy. Once again Shri Bharata spoke, saying: “If I fail to bring back Shri Rama then I will dwell there with him in the forest as Lakshmana has done. O You Wise Men, accompany me to the forest and with your good help, I will try every means to persuade him to return; skilled excavators, engineers and carpenters have been sent forward by me to render the road passable.”

The lover of his brother, Shri Bharata, turning to the royal counsellors, addressed the wise Sumantra seated near them and said: “Go speedily and summon the army in my name to accompany me to the forest and bring the leaders here.”

Sumantra gladly carried out the commands of Prince Bharata. The military commanders were filled with joy at the order of Prince Bharata to proceed with the army to recall Shri Rama. In every home, wives joyfully urged their husbands to go with all speed and bring back Shri Rama.

The leaders of the army riding their swift horses or in bullock carts and chariots gave the order to march. His preceptor the Guru Vasishtha being near, Shri Bharata said to Sumantra who was at his side, “Speedily prepare my chariot”. Sumantra replied with reverence “Be it so” and highly pleased brought the chariot to which excellent horses were yoked. The Prince, filled with fortitude, illustrious, of fixed vows and a hero of the region of truth, resolving to recall Shri Rama from the forest, addressed Sumantra saying: “O Sumantra, mobilise the army and order my friends and the chiefs of the people to be prepared. I desire to recall Rama for the good of the world.”

As instructed by the great prince, Sumantra speedily issued the command to the chiefs of the army and the friends of Bharata, fully explaining its purpose. In every dwelling the brahmins, the warriors, the merchants and the labourers brought together camels, chariots, mules, elephants and excellent horses.