Prompted by disappointment and anger, Manthara, casting the jewel away, in disdain, cried: “O Foolish Queen, this is no occasion for rejoicing, dost you know that you are about to be submerged in a sea of sorrow? I cannot but laugh silently at your folly. You rejoicest when there is reason to mourn! I pity your simplicity, how should a woman rejoice in the advancement of the son of her enemy? Prince Bharata has an equal right to the kingdom with Ramacandra. Rama fears Prince Bharata and, fearing him, seeks to displace him. Lakshmana, though heir to the throne, is Rama’s obedient servant, just as Prince Shatrughna is faithful to Bharata. O Beautiful One, by birth Bharata has a claim to the throne. Traditionally, the kingdom should be his. Shri Rama is well-versed in affairs of state, and acts promptly in his own interests. Knowing the danger threatening Bharata from Rama, I am filled with dread.

“To-day, Queen Kaushalya is fortunate indeed; her son will be enthroned by the holy brahmins at dawn, when the Pushya star is in the ascendant. Thereafter, you shalt have to stand in complete submission like a stone, before Queen Kaushalya whose enemies will be subdued. Thus, not only you, but the virtuous Prince Bharata will become a servant and dependent on the Queen Kaushalya. The women of Shri Rama’s household will be filled with joy, but your daughters-in-law, having no status, will suffer great anxiety and sorrow.”

Queen Kaikeyi believing Manthara really to be benevolently disposed to her, began to extol the great virtues of Ramacandra, saying: “Shri Rama instructed by his holy Guru is truly righteous, grateful, truthful and pious; he, the eldest son of the king, assuredly deserves to be made regent. May he live long! He will ever protect his brothers and servants as a father protects his children. O Kubija, why art you jealous of Rama’s coronation? After a hundred years, Bharata will inherit the throne of his illustrious ancestors. Why art you sad on such a joyful occasion, O Manthara? Shri Ramacandra is as dear to me as is Bharata, he serves me with greater zeal even than he does Queen Kaushalya. If Shri Rama ascends the throne, it is as if Bharata ruled the land; Shri Rama regards his brother as himself.”

Hearing the Queen’s words, Manthara intensely provoked, sighed deeply and said: “O Stupid One, you deemest adversity to be prosperity, you are sinking in an ocean of suffering and yet dost not perceive it. When Rama becomes king, who will succeed him, Prince Bharata or his own son? Prince Bharata will remain without a kingdom forever.

“O Beautiful Princess, all the sons of the king cannot occupy the throne, and if they could, it would bring calamity. Therefore, O Kaikeyi, the sovereign confers his throne on the eldest son; yet, if the younger son be endowed with good qualities he may succeed; the kingdom is given to one and one only. When Rama becomes king, then your son like an orphan, deprived of all comfort, will be cast forth from the royal dynasty to suffer. I have come to tell you this for your good and you dost not comprehend it. If you were wise, you wouldst not reward me with this jewel on account of the increased prosperity of your rival. Assuredly when Rama assumes the regency, he will either banish Prince Bharata or have him put to death. Through proximity people acquire affection even for inanimate objects, but you didst send your son in his childhood to your father’s house.

“Prince Shatrughna has accompanied Bharata; Lakshmana follows Rama as Shatrughna follows Bharata. It is said that a tree marked down for felling by the dwellers of the forest is preserved by the proximity of the thorny ishika bushes. Thus will Lakshmana ever protect Rama, and Rama in return will preserve Lakshmana. These two brothers love each other as do the Asvins; this is well known. Rama will, therefore, seek to harm Bharata though he will ever protect Lakshmana. I, therefore, consider it were best for Bharata to escape to the forest. If Rama succeed to his father’s kingdom, how may your welfare and that of your relatives be assured? To you Bharata is a child worthy of happiness but to Rama he is a rival. When Rama is king, Bharata will not live long. It becomes you, therefore, O Queen, to protect Prince Bharata, as the leader of a herd of elephants protects it from the lion’s spring. Prompted by pride, you have in the past slighted Queen Kaushalya; dost you think she will spare you when she is chief queen? O Beautiful One, note well when Rama obtains the kingdom together with its mountains, seas and valleys, then you and your son, Prince Bharata, will suffer ignominy. Assuredly, when Rama is king, Prince Bharata will be deprived of life, therefore, act so that Rama may be exiled to the forest and Bharata obtain the kingdom.”