Preceded by Shri Vishvamitra, Shri Rama and Lakshmana came to the king’s place of sacrifice. Beholding the sacrificial pavilion, they said to the holy sage: “How well has the great Janaka prepared for the sacrifice! O August Rishi, thousands of brahmins learned in the Vedas, from many lands, with hundreds of bullock carts transporting their possessions, can be seen here. O Holy Father, let us choose a place where you mayest rest.”

The Sage thereupon selected a place which was secluded and supplied with water.

Hearing of the arrival of Shri Vishvamitra, King Janaka, accompanied by his illustrious priest, Shri Shatananda, and many others, hastened to that place and humbly offered obeisance to the holy sage. Then the king placed the traditional gifts of water sweetened with honey before him and he, accepting the gifts, enquired as to the king’s welfare and further whether the sacrifice was proceeding without hindrance; he then duly inquired concerning the welfare of Shri Shatananda and other holy men in attendance on their sovereign.

The king received all with a cheerful countenance and with joined palms said to Shri Vishvamitra: “O August Lord, please be seated with the other great sages.” Thus requested, they sat down, after which Janaka with his family priest, brahmins and counsellors occupied their places, the king seated in the midst of his ministers.

Having attended to the due placing of his guests, the illustrious sovereign said: “O Lord, to-day, by the grace of the gods, all the preparations for the sacrifice have been carried out, now by thine advent here I have acquired merit equal to the fruit of my sacrifice. Blessed am I that you have honoured the place of sacrifice with your presence. O Divine Sage, the high priests have informed me that the sacrifice will be completed in the course of twelve days, the gods will then come to take their share; You, O Illustrious Lord, shalt behold them.”

Having thus addressed the sage, the king again earnestly enquired of him, saying: “May prosperity attend you! O Sage, who are these two illustrious princes, equalling the gods in power, whose bearing resembles the majesty of an elephant, or a lion, who are valiant and whose eyes are like lotuses, who are armed with swords, bows and quivers and whose beauty rivals the Asvini-Kumara, who are youthful and appear to have descended from heaven to earth like the gods? Have they come here on foot? Whose sons are they? They, whose eyes are wide set and who are armed with sacred weapons, who wear their hair like Karttikeya and who captivate the hearts of men by their magnanimous and virtuous qualities? Surely they are come hither to exalt our hearts and add to the fame of our dynasty? Adorning the earth as the sun or moon adorn the sky, in stature and bearing resembling each other, O Great Sage, whose sons are they? Please tell me all!”

Hearing the words of King Janaka, Shri Vishvamitra said: “These are the sons of King Dasaratha.”

He then told the king of their residence in the Siddha-Asrama and of the slaying of the demons, of their visit to Vishala and the rescue of Ahalya, also of their meeting with the Sage Gautama. Then he said: “Now have we come to see the great bow.”

Having related all this to the king, the great muni became silent.