Time passed and the spring came again while the holy sage was at the court of King Dasaratha. On a propitious day, the king decided to enter upon the sacrifice.

He approached Rishyasringa and, bowing low, offered salutations to him, inviting that god-like sage to assist in the sacrifice he was observing, to preserve the dynasty. The sage agreed and requested the king to provide the necessary material for the sacrifice and to let loose the horse.

The sovereign commanded his minister Sumantra to summon with all speed the priests acquainted with the philosophy of the Veda, and sent invitations to the sages Vamadeva, Javali, Kasyapa, the high priest Vasishtha and other exalted and learned brahmins.

Sumantra, setting out in haste, approached the sages courteously and brought them to the king. The virtuous monarch, after paying respectful homage to them, addressed them humbly, speaking words full of candour and integrity.

He said: “O Sages, despite my ardent desire to have an heir, I am without one. I have, therefore, decided to perform the horse sacrifice to that end. I desire the sacrifice to be observed according to the scriptural laws and through the grace of the Sage Rishyasringa, I hope to attain my purpose.”

The sages advised the king to gather together the sacrificial articles and to release the horse.

They said: “Righteous is your desire to be blessed with a son; O King, you shalt surely obtain four illustrious sons of limitless valour.”

The brahmins’ words convinced the king that heirs would be granted to him and he communicated his satisfaction to his ministers. He said: “O Counsellors, bring together four high priests and set the horse at liberty under the protection of four hundred warriors. Let a sacrificial pavilion be set up on the bank of the river Sarayu, and let appropriate protective rites be observed lest obstructions arise.”

The king then ordained that during the period of sacrifice neither priests nor other persons should be subject to any suffering whatsoever. He said: “In such rites, others have been impeded by sub-human beings, which has resulted in the annulment of the sacrifice. You should, therefore, employ every means to bring the sacrifice to a successful conclusion.”

Hearing the words of the king, the ministers—highly gratified—began to act according to his instructions. Then the brahmins assured the king that the sacrifice would be accomplished without hindrance and offering him obeisance, returned to their homes.

The brahmins having departed, the king bade farewell to his ministers and entered his private apartments.