Seeing Shurpanakha beside herself, lying on the ground, having returned without accomplishing her design, Khara addressed her in harsh tones, saying:—

“Have I not placed those valiant demons, living on flesh at your disposal, for your pleasure? Why dost you still complain? They are zealous, loyal and have ever been my trusted servants. Though invincible, even had they to die, they would not disobey me. What is this? I wish to know the reason why you are rolling on the earth like a serpent, crying ‘O, my Lord Why, since I am your protector, dost you lament like one abandoned? Rise, rise! Let us have no more of these tears and swoonings.”

Thus did Khara, her brother, speak to that terrible Rakshasi to comfort her, and she, wiping away her tears, said:—

“When I came hither with my nose and ears severed, drenched in blood, which flowed forth like a river, you didst console me. To please me, you didst command fourteen valiant demons to slay the ruthless Rama and Lakshmana. These demons, incensed against Rama, armed with spears and pikes, have fallen victims to his murderous arrows, in combat. Witnessing those skilled warriors, felled to the ground in an instant and Rama’s great exploit, I am filled with extreme fear.

“Trembling in every limb, terrified and beside myself, I take refuge in you once more, O Prowler of the Night, seeing cause for apprehension on every side. Submerged as I am in the infinite ocean of distress, haunted by the crocodiles of affliction and the billows of fear, will you not rescue me? Under Rama’s fiery arrows, the demons, eaters of flesh, who followed me, are lying on the ground.

“If you have any pity for me and for these demons, if you are possessed of the courage and strength to meet Rama in battle, then, O Prowler of the Night, slay this thorn in the side of the demons, who has set up his hermitage in the Dandaka Forest.

“If you dost not bring about the death of Rama, the Slayer of his Foes, this very day, I shall yield up my life in your presence, dishonoured. I see clearly, that even supported by your forces, you are not able to meet Rama in pitched battle.

“You deemest thyself to be a great hero, but you are not really so, your prowess exists only in thine own conceited imaginings; therefore do you leave Janasthana, in all haste, with your companions, O Stigma of Your Race! Do you return victor in the struggle, for, if you have neither the strength, nor the valour to slay these two men, how canst you remain here?

“Defeated by Rama’s prowess, you will surely die, for he is truly brave, that son of Dasaratha, Rama, and his brother also, who disfigured me is supremely valiant!”

Thus, in the presence of her brother, did that Rakshasi lament again and again, beating her breast and, overcome with mortification, lost consciousness. Then, after a space coming to her senses, exercised with grief, she continued to cry out and strike her breast with her hands.