Having slain the mighty and terrible Viradha in the forest, the valiant Rama embraced Sita and comforted her; then addressing the resplendent Lakshmana, he said:—

“This impenetrable forest is dangerous and we are not its natural inhabitants; let us therefore seek out the Sage Sharabhanga without delay.”

Raghava then turned his steps towards Sharabhanga’s hermitage and, approaching that Sage, whose soul was purified by renunciation, he observed a great marvel.

In the sky, he beheld Indra, gorgeously attired in robes free from any particle of dust, his body shining like the sun or fire, mounted on a splendid chariot, followed by all the Celestials and innumerable high-souled sages like unto himself, who served as his escort. Bay horses were yoked to that aerial car, that shone like the rising sun and, luminous as the moon’s disc, resembled a mass of white clouds.

Rama also observed an immaculate canopy with magnificent garlands and marvellous fans made of yaks’ tails with handles of gold of great price, which two women of rare beauty, waved to and fro over the head of that God, whilst Gandharvas, Immortals, Celestial Beings and great Rishis, paid homage to him with sublime chants, as he hovered in space.

Seeing Shatakratu conversing with the Sage Sharabhanga, Rama pointed out the chariot to his brother and bade him gaze on the marvellous sight.

He said:—“O Lakshmana, dost you behold that dazzling car of great brilliance shining like the sun in the skies? Without doubt, these are the celestial bay horses of Indra of whom we have heard, who travels through space and who is constantly invoked at the time of sacrifice. Those youthful warriors wearing earrings, who in groups of hundreds, with swords in their hands, stand round him in the sky, with their broad chests and strong arms resembling maces, clad in magnificent purple, look like fierce tigers. On their breasts, gleam rows of pearls, and those lions among men, of handsome mien [men?], appear to be twenty-five years old which is the age at which the Gods ever remain, O Saumitri. Tarry here a moment, O Lakshmana, so that I may discover who this great hero in the chariot really is.”

Having uttered the words ‘Tarry here’ to Saumitri, Kakutstha advanced towards the hermitage of Sharabhanga.

Seeing Rama approaching, the Lord of Sachi, taking leave of the sage, said to the Gods:—

“Rama is coming hither, take me to mine abode ’ere he addresses me; later he shall behold me! When he returns victorious, having fulfilled his purpose, I shall readily show myself to him. It is for him to perform a great exploit impossible for any other to accomplish.”

Thereafter, offering salutations to the ascetic, in all humility, the God who bears the thunderbolt, the Scourge of his Foes, ascended to heaven in his chariot, harnessed with horses.

When the God of a Thousand Eyes had departed, Raghava rejoined his consort and his brother and together they approached Sharabhanga, who was seated before the sacred fire. Embracing his feet, Rama, Sita and Lakshmana, on his invitation, seated themselves in the place assigned to them.

Questioned by Raghava concerning Indra’s visit, Sharabhanga related everything to him.

He said:—

“O Rama, that magnanimous God wished to conduct me to Brahmaloka, the region I have attained by the merit of my penances, which is inaccessible to those who are not masters of themselves.

“Seeing you approaching, know well, O Foremost of Men, that I had no desire to enter Brahmaloka ’ere I had enjoyed your gentle presence in my hermitage. O Lion among Men, O Virtuous and Magnanimous Prince, having had intercourse with you, I shall ascend first to the three lower heavens and thereafter to the highest. These worlds of unsurpassed beauty that have been conquered by me, these sublime abodes of Brahma, that are mine by right, do you accept, O Lion among Men!”

Hearing the words of the Rishi Sharabhanga, Raghava, that lion among men, versed in the Shastras, answered:—

“I also have conquered all the worlds, O Great Ascetic, but in obedience to my vow I desire to remain in the forest.”

Thus addressed by Raghava, whose might was equal to Indra’s, the eminently sagacious Sharabhanga spoke again, saying:—

“O Rama, the illustrious and virtuous Sutikshna lives in this forest; that saint will tell you what is best for you to do.

“Follow the river Mandakini, that stream which is covered with a carpet of flowers, and you will reach his dwelling place. There is the path, O Tiger among Men, but stay with me a moment yet, till I abandon this body as a snake casts off its slough.”

Thereafter, having prepared a fire and poured clarified butter therein, Sharabhanga, that sage of supreme merit, entered the flames to the accompaniment of sacred formulas.

The hair of the magnanimous one was consumed together with his wrinkled skin, his bones, his flesh and his blood, whereupon, assuming a youthful and splendid appearance, Sharabhanga rose from the pyre like a flame.

Traversing the region where the sacrificial fires are tended by high-souled sages, as well as that of the Gods, he ascended to Brahma’s abode.

That foremost of Rishis, of purified karma, there beheld the Grandsire of the World with those attendant on him, who, seeing that sage, addressed him, saying:—“You are welcome!”