Yet a little of the enchanting night still remained, when the bards began to praise the prince; three hours before the sun rose, the great drums were struck with golden sticks, while conches were blown and the sound of countless musical instruments was heard.

The music filling the heavens increased the grief of Prince Bharata, who commanded it to cease, saying: “I am not the king.” Then addressing Prince Shatrughna, he said: “Hear, O Brother, how unfitting are the praises now sung at the instance of Queen Kaikeyi. She has done us a great wrong. The king has departed to the regions of the gods and left me desolate. The future and the kingdom trembling in uncertainty, resembles a ship without a pilot drifting on the ocean. My father is dead and my mother, abandoning the path of virtue, has sent Shri Rama into exile.”

The women of the palace, hearing the great prince lamenting, began to weep aloud pitifully. At this time, the great and illustrious Sage Vasishtha, versed in the science of government, appeared in the assembly hall, which was decorated with wrought gold, encrusted with gems. Attended by his followers, the spiritual preceptor of the royal dynasty, entered the council chamber, as Indra enters the celestial hall named Sudharma. Seated on a golden throne, which was covered with an excellent carpet with the svastika design, Shri Vasishtha said to the messengers: “Go speedily and summon the learned brahmins, the counsellors, the warriors and the leaders of the army; matters of great importance await them 1 Bring also the royal princes together with their secretaries and ministers, Yudhajita and Sumantra!”

A great tumult now arose from those invited, who approached in chariots and on horses and elephants.

The counsellors seeing Prince Bharata drawing near, were gladdened by his sight as though King Dasaratha himself had entered the assembly.

The presence of Bharata added to the splendour of the court so that it appeared as when King Dasaratha was present, or as the clear waters of the ocean are enhanced by whales, alligators, shells and golden sand.