Instructed by Shri Vasishtha, King Dasaratha with a cheerful countenance sent for Prince Rama and also Prince Lakshmana. At the time of their departure, the Peace Chant was recited by the king, whilst the Guru Vasishtha pronounced the benediction. The illustrious sovereign then smelt the heads of his sons with joy and delivered them into the care of the sage.

When the lotus-eyed Ramacandra and Prince Lakshmana had taken their leave, Vayu sent forth cool and gentle breezes redolent with fragrance and the celestial beings showered down flowers, to the sound of the beating of drums and the blowing of conches.

Shri Vishvamitra led the way followed by the most illustrious Ramacandra, then came Shri Lakshmana of flowing locks, bearing a bow in his hand.

The two handsome and powerful princes with quivers on their backs and bows in their hands, adding lustre to the ten cardinal points, followed the muni as if two three-headed snakes were following Shri Vishvamitra or as the Asvinikumaras and Kinneras follow Brahma.

Shri Ramacandra and Lakshmana, armed with their bows, adorned with precious jewels and wearing gloves made of deerskin, resplendent and beautiful, girt with swords, following the holy sage, looked like the two sons of Shiva.

Coming to the river Sarayu, nine miles to the south of the capital, the Sage Vishvamitra addressed Shri Rama in gentle accents, saying: “O Child, purify your body with water. When you have done so, I will teach you the use of Bala and Atibala. The application of these two herbs will prevent you from being fatigued or suffering from disease, nor will age affect you. Even should’st you retire to rest without performing the purification ceremony no demon will be able to afflict you; none in the world will equal you in prowess. O Rama, no one in the three worlds will rival you in good fortune, skill, knowledge and practical wisdom. O Prince, when you have learnt these sciences, you will be able to answer any question and you will be unique in scholarship. These two sciences, O Rama, are the parents of all other sciences. You will be able to control hunger and thirst by their application. O Prince of the House of Raghu, by the mastery of this lore, Bala and Atibala, you will attain renown throughout the whole world. These brilliant sciences are the daughters of Brahma, I shall impart them to you, O Prince, because you are qualified to receive them. O Rama, all the fruits of this knowledge are already your attributes, yet when you have mastered it, you will be able to teach it to others.”

Shri Ramacandra then poured the water over his body and with a cheerful countenance said to the Sage Vishvamitra:—“O Great Rishi, I am your servant, teach me these sciences.”

Possessed of the knowledge of these two sciences, the mighty Rama resembled the sun in autumn, emitting a thousand rays. Then the two brothers massaged the feet of the holy Guru and passed the night pleasantly on the banks of the river Sarayu. Shri Rama being unaccustomed to sleeping on the ground, the two sons of King Dasaratha made a bed of grass, then having listened to the gentle words of Shri Vishvamitra, they passed the night in sleep.