The face of Queen Kaikeyi flushed with anger, and sighing deeply, she said to Manthara: “To-day, I shall indeed banish Rama and ensure that Bharata be proclaimed regent. O Manthara, how may Bharata become regent, and Rama be deprived of the kingdom?”

Hearing these words, the sinful Manthara, bent upon the complete destruction of Shri Rama, said to the queen: “Hear, O Kaikeyi, I will unfold to you the only course which will lead to the coronation of Prince Bharata. O Kaikeyi, hast you forgotten that which you have often related to me? O Lover of Poesy, if it be your desire to hear the tale from my lips, listen and then take action.”

Thus addressed, Queen Kaikeyi, rising from her couch, replied: “O Manthara, relate by what means Bharata may acquire the throne and Shri Rama suffer eclipse.”

Then the wicked Manthara, desirous of doing injury to Rama, said: “Formerly when your husband was engaged in a war between the devas and asuras, he supported the cause of Indra. He took you with him and I accompanied you. O Kaikeyi, to the south, in the Dandaka forest, there ruled a king named Timidvaja in his capital Bijayanta. He was versed in the magic named Shambara, and he was unconquerable by the gods. He waged war on Indra and in the great conflict the asuras, at night, carried off the wounded from their beds and slew them. King Dasaratha fought great battles with these asuras who pierced his body many times with their weapons. He, falling unconscious, you, O Devi, brought him from the battlefield and when they still assailed him, didst skilfully preserve him. O Beautiful One, then the king, your lord, well pleased with you, proffered you two boons, and you didst answer: ‘I shall claim them when the need arises.’

“I was not then acquainted with this matter, but you didst later relate it to me. Prompted by my love for you, I have treasured all this in my memory. Now, demand the cessation of preparations for Shri Rama’s enthronement. For the first boon ask for the proclamation of Bharata as regent, and for the second the banishment of Rama for fourteen years. During the period of his exile, men will grow to love your son and his rule will be assured.

“O, Daughter of a Mighty King, entering the chamber of wrath, clad in soiled raiment, cast thyself on the bare ground. On the entrance of the king, neither look at nor speak to him but, rolling on the ground, continue to weep. Doubtless you are very dear to your lord who, for your sake, would enter a raging fire. The king would never provoke you nor can he bear to see you weep. He would sacrifice life itself for your sake. The king cannot be indifferent to your requests. O Indolent One, test the power of your beauty to-day; but have a care lest the king offer you diamonds, pearls, gold and other gems, and be not caught in the snare of greed.

“O Fortunate One, remind the king of the two boons promised to you on the battlefield; strive hard for the success of thine undertaking. If the king would lift you up, let him on oath renew his promise. Do you say to him: ‘O Great King, send Rama into exile for fourteen years and make Bharata ruler of the kingdom.’

“Whilst Rama is absent, the rule of Bharata will be established and he will reign forever. O Beautiful One, demand the exile of Rama, from King Dasaratha, and all will be well with your son. Men will forget their love for Rama and will cease to care for him, and Bharata will have no enemy anywhere. When Shri Rama returns, the supremacy of Bharata will be firmly established; ruling with love, he will inspire affection and many friends will support him. Therefore, O Queen, questioned by the king, fearlessly and firmly demand that the preparations for Rama’s enthronement be terminated.”

Kaikeyi, thus prevailed upon to execute the evil design of Manthara and fully prepared to comply with it, followed her counsel as a young chicken follows its mother. The beautiful queen, aggrieved that the king had not consulted her concerning this great event, said: “O Manthara, you are truly my sincere well-wisher! Of all deformed creatures on earth, you are the wisest. O Kubija, as yet, I fail to comprehend the king’s real intention. Deformed women are usually sinful and perverse, but you, O Kubija, art unique, resembling a lotus bending to the breeze. In spite of your physical defect, you are not to be despised. It would seem that your slender waist, bashful of your full rounded bosom, had withdrawn itself. O Manthara, your face is like the full moon, you are indeed lovely, your body is smooth, your waist decorated with a girdle, your thighs are long, your limbs slender. O Manthara, when you walkest before me, clad in a silken sari, reaching to your ankles, you are as graceful as a swan.

“Acquainted with every grace and blandishment, your hump protruding like the hub of a wheel is surely filled with wisdom, diplomacy and understanding. I, therefore, present you with' a gold chain to adorn it.

“O Lovely Woman, when Bharata becomes king and Rama goes into exile, I will cover your hump with beaten gold. When I am certain of the success of my undertaking, I will apply sandalwood paste to your hump, and to your forehead a diadem of gold and gems.

“O Kubija, I will give you ornaments of pure gold; thus attired and adorned you shalt be free to live as you pleases. You shalt put my sister queens to shame and precede them with pride. O You whose face is incomparably beautiful, you are a rival of the full moon. O Deformed One, many hunchbacked women wearing golden ornaments shall attend you as your handmaids.”

Thus flattered, Manthara reclining on a white couch, glowing like an altar flame, spoke: “O Fortunate One, it is useless to construct a dam when the water has run away, therefore, enter on thine undertaking immediately. Go wait upon the king in the chamber of wrath.”

Thus prompted by Kubija, the beautiful-eyed Queen Kaikeyi, filled with ambition, entered the chamber of wrath with Manthara. There, inspired by the hunchbacked woman, casting her pearl necklace of immeasurable value on the ground, the queen rolling on the floor, addressed her: “O Kubija, either Rama shall go into exile and Bharata obtain the kingdom, or King Dasaratha will have news of my death. I shall neither put on ornaments, nor partake of delicious dishes; if Rama is installed, it shall be the end of my life.”

Manthara continued to instruct Kaikeyi in the most cruel manner, uttering words hostile to Rama. “Know well, O Fortunate One, should Rama become ruler, it will mean endless suffering for you and your son. Therefore exert thyself to overthrow him.”

The queen, wounded by the shafts of Manthara’s words, placing both hands on her heart, replied angrily: “O Kubija, either you shalt bear the news of my death to the king, or Rama shall be exiled and Bharata enthroned. If Rama be not exiled, then I shall neither sleep on a bed nor wear flowing garments, nor apply sandalwood paste nor antimony to my person. Except Bharata be enthroned, I shall neither eat nor drink. If this is not accomplished, I do not desire to live.”

Having firmly resolved this, casting her ornaments to the ground, she, herself, lay down like a fallen kinnari.1 Her face veiled in wrath, her body stripped of its garlands and jewels, the queen resembled the sky bereft of sun and stars.