In the absence of Sita, the lotus-eyed, righteous and mighty Rama, his mind distraught with suffering, tortured by love for her, though unable to see her, with bitter sighs, reproached her as if she were present, saying:—

“O You, whose youthful flowering is more graceful than the Ashoka branches, do not conceal thyself and increase my pain! O Darling! Your thighs resemble the plaintain boughs which conceal you, yet, O Goddess, you canst not hide from me! Laughing, you have taken refuge in the Karnikara grove, but enough of this jesting which is torturing me! It is not fitting to sport thus in a hermitage, though I know laughter to be natural to you, O Darling! Return, O Large-eyed Damsel, your hut is desolate!

“Alas! It is certain that those titans have devoured my Sita or borne her away and it is for this reason that she does not appear; she would never mock me thus in my sorrow, O Lakshmana!

“O Saumitri, observe these deer from whose eyes the tears fall and who seem to say that Sita has been devoured by those Rangers of the Night. O Noble Lady, where hast you gone? O My Chaste One, my Lovely One! Alas 1 The desires of Kaikeyi are fulfilled to-day! I went into exile with Sita and shall now return alone. How shall I enter the palace of the queens bereft of her presence? Will not the people say: ‘He is a heartless wretch!’

“By the loss of Sita, I shall bear the stigma of cowardice and when my exile is over, Janaka, the King of Mithila, will enquire of me as to our welfare. How shall I answer him? The Sovereign of Videha, seeing me return without Sita, will be overwhelmed with grief on account of her death and become a prey to madness!

“No, I will never return to Ayodhya ruled over by Bharata; heaven itself would prove a desert without Sita. Do you leave me in the forest and return to the opulent city of Ayodhya. As for me, I cannot live anywhere without Sita. Embracing Bharata tenderly, say to him in my name: ‘It is Rama’s command that you rule the earth.’ Making obeisance to our mothers, Kaikeyi, Sumitra and Kaushalya, with due respect, protect them with all your might, taking counsel of the wise. O Destroyer of Your Foes, it is for you to recount to them the death of Sita and mine own, in every detail.”

Thus did Raghava lament, while ranging the forest full of distress, far from Sita of lovely locks, whilst Lakshmana, his features blanched with terror, felt himself about to lose his reason in the excess of his grief.