Entering the private apartment, Shri Ramacandra beheld King Dasaratha full of distress, his countenance pale, seated with Kaikeyi on the royal couch. First placing his head at the feet of his royal sire, he then respectfully offered salutations to Mother Kaikeyi.

The king, his eyes filled with tears, his throat choked with emotion, could only utter the word “Rama” and nothing more. As the heart of a man who accidentally touches a serpent is filled with fear, so was the heart of Rama on beholding the king’s misery. The king agitated by grief and remorse, sighing bitterly, filled with anguish, resembled the ocean which, calm by nature, is agitated by a mighty storm, or Rahu causing the sun’s eclipse, or the soul of a sage stirred by the utterance of falsehoods. Without knowing the cause of the king’s distress, Shri Rama became agitated like the sea on the day of the full moon. Shri Ramacandra, ever engaged in seeking his father’s welfare, reflected: “Why is my father not happy to see me to-day? Formerly, when displeased, on beholding me he was pacified, but to-day, beholding me, he is troubled. Why is he overcome with grief and bereft of his glory?”

Making obeisance to Kaikeyi, he said: “If by an involuntary offence, I have caused my father displeasure, then O Mother, propitiate him for me. Erstwhile, even when displeased, my father showed favour to me, but to-day, I behold him pale of countenance, and deeply distressed, nor does he speak to me. Is my revered father suffering any physical or mental distress? It is rare indeed for a man to be consistently happy. Has his majesty seen any grievous fault in the amiable Prince Bharata or the valorous Shatrughna, or in my mothers or in me? I do not desire to live a single instant if his majesty is not satisfied with me, or is displeased or if I have disobeyed him. Why should not man obey his parents, who are the source of his birth and who are living gods? Hast you spoken harsh words, in vanity, to the king, on hearing which his heart is lacerated? O Devi, answer my question truly. Tell me the cause of this unprecedented grief in my sire.”

Kaikeyi thus addressed by Shri Rama, dead to all shame and skilful in defence of her selfish purpose, spoke arrogantly: “O Rama, the king is not angry nor is he suffering physical pain, he has something on his mind which he fears to disclose to you. He loves you dearly and so hesitates to tell you this unpleasant matter. It is for you to fulfil what he has promised to me and to act in accordance with it. Having formerly granted me a boon, he now repents it like a common man. To promise a boon and then seek to evade it, is like the setting up of a dam when the water has gone. O Rama, have a care lest the king abandon truth for your sake. Among holy men, truth is said to be the root of dharma. Should the king command you and you fulfil his command without further deliberation, then will I reveal the whole truth to you. The king may not communicate with you directly, therefore, be ready to execute what I command on his behalf.”

Shri Rama, highly agitated, replied to Kaikeyi in the presence of the king: “For shame, O Devi, to speak thus to me. At the command of my father I am willing to do anything, even to casting myself into the fire. At the bidding of the king my parent and author of my welfare, I will gladly drink deadly poison or throw myself into the sea. O Devi, disclose to me his will, I vow to fulfil his command. Be assured, O Mother, Rama does not utter falsehood.”

To the ever truthful Rama, Kaikeyi answered in these wounding words: “O Ramacandra, long ago the Maharajah fought against the asuras and fell wounded on the field. I then preserved him and he promised me two boons. For these I ask the installation of Prince Bharata and your exile to the Dandaka forest. O Great One, if you desirest that you and your father should uphold truth, then hear me. In obedience to your father, now go into exile for fourteen years. Let the preparations made for thine installation be used for the enthronement of Bharata. Giving up your claims to the kingdom, do you with matted hair, wearing a deer skin, live in the Dandaka forest for seven and again seven years. Let the earth be ruled by Prince Bharata. This kingdom filled with an abundance of gems, horses and elephants must be his. On account of this is the king distressed, his countenance pale and he is unable to look on you. O Rama, obey the king and preserve him by fulfilling his command.”

At these cruel words of Kaikeyi, Shri Ramacandra betrayed no sign of distress, but the king realising the future suffering of his son was overwhelmed with grief.