Having heard the moving tale related by Guha, Prince Bharata began to reflect on Rama. That tender prince of powerful arms, whose shoulders resembled a lion’s and whose eyes were like the lotus, who was patient, youthful and charming in appearance yet sad at heart, at length sank to the ground unconscious, like an elephant stricken to the heart by a goad.

Prince Shatrughna ever in attendance on Bharata, deeply afflicted by his state, embracing his body, wept aloud. Then all the mothers of Prince Bharata, emaciated with fasting and sorrow for their deceased lord, surrounded him, lying unconscious on the earth. The pious Queen Kaushalya approaching, raised Bharata up and pressed him to her breast. The ascetic queen, the lover of her son, straining him to her bosom as if he were her own child, weeping, enquired of him, saying: “O My Son, art you afflicted by pain? The life of this royal family wholly depends on you! O Child, Shri Rama has gone to the forest with Lakshmana, I live only if I behold your face. King Dasaratha being dead, you alone art the protector of the people. O Child, hast you heard aught against Lakshmana or my only son, who, with his wife is gone to the forest?”

The renowned Bharata returning to his normal consciousness, consoled the weeping Kaushalya and then addressed Guha: “O Guha, where did my brother pass the night here? What did he eat, on what couch did he rest? Where did Sita and Lakshmana dwell?”

Guha, the King of Nishadas, gladly related how he had entertained his gracious guest, Shri Rama. He said, “O Bharata, rice, other foods and fruit in abundance were placed by me, before Shri Rama. To please me, that hero of the realm of truth, Shri Ramacandra, accepted the gifts, but recollecting his duty as a kshatriya did not partake of them. He said: “O Friend, we are warriors and it is our duty to give all to others, not accepting any gift for ourselves.”

That night, the great-hearted Rama, having with Sita drunk the water brought by Shri Lakshmana, retired to rest, fasting. Shri Lakshmana finishing the water that was left over, all observed silence and performed the evening devotion with concentration. Thereafter the son of Sumitra brought kusha grass and spread it on the earth to serve as a couch for Rama. As Shri Rama and Sita rested there, Shri Lakshmana washed their feet in pure water and then moved to a distance to* mount guard over them.

O Prince, here is that Ingudi tree, and here is the couch of grass on which Rama and Sita slept. That hero, Shri Lakshmana with his quiver filled with arrows, bound to his body, donning gloves made of goha-skin, drawing the string of his bow, paced round and round at a distance, guarding the royal pair.

I also, O Prince, surrounded by my kinsmen, armed with an excellent bow, kept watch through the night, protecting Shri Ramacandra, who resembled Indra.