Seated in his chariot, the prince beheld his delighted friends and the city, white as a cloud, adorned with flags and banners fluttering here and there, fragrant with the perfume of incense, filled with a multitude of men and enriched by stately buildings. Passing through the scented highways where heaps of sandalwood were burning, and rare perfumes, wool and silken cloths, unpierced pearls, and innumerable gems being exposed to view, with stalls replete with articles of food and drink and merchandise of every kind, he beheld the royal highway adorned like the pathvay of the gods in heaven, with every auspicious mark, such as curds, rice, sandalwood, parched grain and milk. Traversing the cross-roads gay with flowers and fragrant objects, amidst the blessings and salutations of his friends, he acknowledged their praise with humility. Those advanced in years, were crying: “O Prince, you who art to be crowned to-day, let your rule resemble your grandfather’s and your great grandfather’s, thus shall we prosper as in the days of thine ancestors, may our happiness exceed even those times. Neither do we require the comforts of this world, nor those of the other world. Beholding Shri Ramacandra returning after his coronation, our delight will exceed all else. Nothing is dearer to us than the installation of Shri Ramacandra of limitless glory.”

Thus did Raghava advance, amidst the eulogies of his friends the focus of every eye and heart, serene and imperturbable. Those who were unable to behold him or were unnoticed by him, became objects of contempt to others, nay, they were a reproach to themselves. The all-compassionate Ramacandra looked on each of the four castes with equal condescension. Each loved him according to his capacity.

Passing the temples, the sacred groves and pavilions, Shri Ramacandra circumambulated them in reverence. He now beheld the royal palace, resembling a white cloud, its towers like the snow-capped peaks of Mount Kailasa, its balconies seeming almost to reach the skies like the fire chariots of the gods; the pleasure houses set with precious gems, caused the whole palace to excel all those on earth and rival even the abode of Indra.

Approaching his father’s palace, Shri Rama passed through the three gateways guarded by archers, and proceeded on foot through the fourth and fifth enclosures. There, leaving his attendants, he entered the private apartments of the king.

The multitude seeing Rama enter the palace were filled with joy and awaited his coming forth as the sea awaits the coming of the full moon.