Stung by Sita’s bitter words, Lakshmana, in his ardent desire to rejoin his elder brother Rama, set out without further delay.

Thereupon Ravana, in the guise of a mendicant, availing himself of the opportunity, rapidly approached the hermitage with the purpose of seeking out Vaidehi. With matted locks, clad in a saffron robe and carrying a triple staff and loshta, that highly powerful one, knowing Sita to be alone, accosted her in the wood, in the form of an ascetic, at dusk when darkness shrouds the earth in the absence of the sun and moon. Gazing on Sita, the consort of Rama, Ravana resembled Rahu regarding Rohini in the absence of Shasi.

Beholding that monstrous apparition, the leaves of the trees ceased to move, the wind grew still, the turbulent course of the river Godaveri subsided and began to flow quietly. The ten-headed Ravana, however, profiting by Rama’s absence, drew near to Sita in the guise of a monk of venerable appearance while she was overcome with grief on account of her lord.

Approaching Vaidehi in an honourable guise, as Saturn draws near to the Citra star, Ravana resembled a deep well overgrown with grass. He stood there gazing on the glorious consort of Rama of incomparable beauty, Sita, with her brilliant lips and teeth, her countenance as radiant as the full moon, seated on a carpet of leaves, overwhelmed with grief, weeping bitterly.

On seeing the Princess of Videha alone, clad in a yellow silken sari, whose eyes resembled lotus petals, the titan, struck by Kama’s arrow, joyfully accosted her, feigning the gentle accents of a brahmin. Praising her beauty, unequalled in the Three Worlds, which caused her to resemble Shri, he said:—

“O You, possessed of the brilliance of gold and silver, who art clad in a yellow silken sari and who, like a pool of lilies, art wreathed in garlands of fresh flowers, art you Lakshmi bereft of her lotus or Kirti or a nymph of graceful aspect? Art you Bhuti of slender hips, or Rati disporting herself in the forest?

“How even, sharp and white are your teeth, how large your slightly reddened eyes with their dark pupils, how well proportioned and rounded are your thighs and how charming your legs, resembling the tapering trunk of an elephant! How round and plump are your cheeks, like unto the polished fruit of the Tala trees; how enchanting is your bosom, decorated with pearls!

“O Lady of Sweet Smiles, lovely teeth and expressive eyes, as a river sweeps away its banks with its swift current so dost you steal away my heart, O Graceful One. Slender is your waist, glossy thine hair, your breasts touching each other enhance your loveliness; neither the consorts of the Gods, the Gan-dharvas, the Yakshas nor the Kinneras can compare with you. ’Till this hour, I have never seen any on earth so perfect; your youth, your beauty and your grace are unequalled in the Three Worlds!

“Seeing you dwelling here in solitude distresses my heart. Come with me! It is not fitting that you should remain here; this place is frequented by ruthless demons, who are able to assume different forms at will. It is for you to reside in sumptuous and delightful palaces in the vicinity of pleasant cities, surrounded by groves of sweet smelling shrubs and green trees, where you canst wander clad in beautiful robes, decked in fragrant garlands, with a consort worthy of your beauty, O Charming One. O Dark-eyed Lady of Sweet Smiles, art you wedded to one of the Rudras, the Maruts or Vasus? You appearest divine to me, yet these are not the haunts of the Gandharvas, Devas or Kinneras, but of the Titans. How hast you come here?

“Dost you not fear to live amidst monkeys, lions, tigers, deer, wolves, bears, hyenas and leopards? O Fair One, dost you not tremble before those terrible elephants, maddened with the exudation of temporal juices, in this great forest? Who art you? To whom dost you belong? For what reason dost you range the Dandaka Forest alone, which is frequented by terrible titans?”

With these flattering words did the evil-minded Ravana address Sita, and seeing him in the guise of a brahmin, she entertained him with the traditional hospitality due to an uninvited guest. Leading him to a seat, she brought water to wash his feet and offered him food, saying:—“Be pleased to accept this repast 1” Seeing him in the form of a Twice-born with his loshta and saffron robe, unrecognizable in his disguise, Sita welcomed him as a true brahmin, saying:—

“Be seated, O Brahmin, and accept this water for washing your feet, also this meal, composed of ripe fruits and roasted grain, prepared for you, which please enjoy.”

Thus did she receive him with hospitable words, but Ravana, his gaze fixed on the Princess of Mithila, determined to bear her away, thus preparing his own destruction.

Sita, anxiously expecting the return from hunting of her illustrious lord, with Prince Lakshmana, searched the vast and darkening forest with her eyes but was unable to see either Rama or his brother there.