Sumantra said: “O Great King, hearken further to the words of the great Sage Sanatkumara:—

“‘In the House of Ikshvaku, there will be a highly righteous and truth-loving king named Dasaratha who will form an alliance with King Lomapada of Anga.

“‘King Dasaratha will approach his friend Lomapada and beg the assistance of Rishyasringa, the husband of the Princess Shanta, in the performance of the sacrifice he desires to observe, that he may be blessed with a son. After mature consideration, King Lomapada will permit Shanta’s lord, Rishyasringa to accompany King Dasaratha. Highly gratified, King Dasaratha will return to his capital with Rishyasringa and will ask the sage to officiate at the sacrifice he is about to perform in order to obtain sons and also a future abode in the celestial regions.

“‘As a result of the sacrifice, King Dasaratha will have four sons, each of limitless valour. These sons will be renowned throughout the world and will increase the glory of their dynasty.’

“This story was narrated by the Sage Sanatkumara in the first quarter of Satya-Yuga. O Great King! You should approach Rishyasringa with a worthy chariot and retinue, and bring him with ceremony to your capital.”

Having heard the good counsel of his minister Sumantra, the King commanded him to inform his Guru Vasishtha of this matter, and the holy Vasishtha acquiesced in the plan.

Then the king, with firm resolve, attended by his queens, counsellors and priests, prepared to set forth for the city where Rishyasringa dwelt. Passing through various forests and traversing many rivers, the king arrived at Lomapada’s capital. There he beheld the resplendent sage, in lustre like a glowing fire, seated near King Lomapada.

Inspired by friendship, the great monarch Lomapada offered respectful salutations to King Dasaratha and informed Rishyasringa of his alliance with this king, whereupon the sage expressed his approval in words of praise.

Having enjoyed the hospitality of King Lomapada for seven days, King Dasaratha addressed him thus: “O King, I desire to enter upon an important undertaking, be gracious enough to allow your daughter Shanta and her lord to return to my capital to assist me.”

Hearing these words, King Lomapada replied: “Be it so,” and turning to the sage said: “Be pleased to go with your wife to the capital of King Dasaratha.”

The youthful sage assented to the command of King Lomapada, and he, in company with his spouse, departed with King Dasaratha.

Having taken leave of his friend, King Dasaratha despatched speedy messengers to go before him to instruct his ministers to prepare for their arrival.

The people of Ayodhya carried out all as they had been commanded and overjoyed at the monarch’s return, fulfilled the instructions of his messengers. The citizens were delighted to behold the young sage entering the city and being honoured by the king, as Indra in heaven pays tribute to Kasyapa.

Having introduced the sage and his consort to the inner apartments, the king offered him the traditional welcome as enjoined in the scriptures.

The royal ladies also welcomed the wide-eyed Shanta with her lord to the private apartments, and expressed their pleasure and delight.

Honoured and worshipped by the queens, no less than by King Dasaratha himself, the Princess Shanta and her husband, the sage, dwelt in the palace as Brihaspati resides in the city of Mahendra.