Shri Vishvamitra in gentle accents, related this story to Shri Ramacandra, and then again addressed him, saying:—

“In ancient times there lived a king named Sagara, who ruled in Ayodhya. He was brave and virtuous and a lover of his subjects, yet he was without issue.

“The name of his chief queen was Keshini, a daughter of King Vidharba; she was virtuous and truthful. His second queen was Sumati, a daughter of Arishtanemi and she was comely and charming.

“The king went to the Himalayas and engaged in severe yogic practices in the forest of Bhriguprasravana. When he had completed a hundred years’ ascetic practices, the ever truthful Maharishi Bhrigu was pleased with hifn and favoured him with a boon.

He said:

‘O Sinless King, you shalt beget many sons and your fame will be immeasurable. From one of your queens shall be born one son, and from the other sixty thousand sons.’

“When the queens heard of the boon granted by the rishi, they approached him saying:

‘O Knower of God, we are certain that your boon will bear fruit, please tell us therefore which of us will beget one son and which sixty thousand?’

“Hearing their words, the highly virtuous Bhrigu said:

‘That depends on your desires. Tell me, which of you would fain be the mother of the founder of the dynasty and which desires to beget sixty thousand illustrious sons?’

“O Rama, Queen Keshini desired to be favoured by one son only, but Sumati, the sister of Garuda obtained the boon of bearing sixty thousand powerful and illustrious sons.

“O Prince, the king offered salutations to the Rishi Bhrigu and with his consorts returned to the capital.

“When the time was ripe, the chief Queen Keshini gave birth to a son who was called Asamanjasa.

“O Great One, a gourd was brought forth by Queen Sumati from which, when opened, sixty thousand male infants emerged. The nurses placed them in jars full of butter and tended them. After a long time they attained to the state of adolescence, and then grew to manhood.

“O Rama, the eldest son of King Sagara, Asamanjasa used to seize hold of children and throw them into the river Sarayu. When he saw them drowning, he rejoiced. This evil doer grew up to oppress the good by his conduct.

“The citizens of King Sagara’s capital exiled the prince, thus passing judgment on him. Asamanjasa became the father of a valiant prince named Amshuman, who was esteemed by everyone and addressed every man with courtesy.

“After a long time, King Sagara resolved to perform a sacrifice. O Rama, the king summoning the high priests began the initiatory rites.”