King Pramati having enquired as to the well-being of Shri Vishvamitra, said:—

“O Holy Sage, may the Lord protect those two youths; be gracious enough to tell me who they may be. These princes, equal to the gods in power, walking with the gait of an elephant, fearless as lions or bulls in combat, whose eyes resemble lotuses, who are armed with swords, bows and quivers, who rival the heavenly Asvins in beauty and who, in the flower of their youth, appear like gods, visiting the earth. Why are they travelling on foot? Whose sons are they? Why are they come? Enhancing the earth as the sun and moon illumine the sky; their manner of address and bearing showing them to be kinsmen, why are these two heroes of high descent, bearing mighty weapons, found on this hard path? I long to hear.”

Shri Vishvamitra related to the king the whole story of the visit to the Siddha Ashrama and the slaying of the asuras.

The king was highly gratified to meet the princes, and perceiving them to be virtuous, entertained them with the greatest respect. Shri Ramacandra and Lakshmana having received hospitality from King Pramati, passed the night there. The following day they left for Mithilapuri, the capital of King Janaka.

When they beheld the city at a distance, they cried out: “How beautiful, how beautiful it is!” Thereafter, finding a charming hermitage which was uninhabited, Rama enquired of the Rishi Vishvamitra as follows: “O Sage, how can it be that this beautiful hermitage is unfrequented? O Lord, tell us whose has been this hermitage?”

Shri Vishvamitra, chief among the eloquent, answered Rama, saying: “O Prince, hear the true story of this hermitage, I will relate to you who was its author and how he cursed it in anger.

“O Rama, this place, a source of wonder even to the gods, belonged to the Rishi Gautama and resembled the abode of the celestials. Here with Ahalya, the sage practised Yoga for thousands of years.

“O Rama, one day, the sage having gone to a distant place, Indra, finding Ahalya alone, assumed his form, and said to her:

‘O Fair One, I am overcome by desire, let us carry out our conjugal duty.’

“O Raghava, though Ahalya recognized Indra disguised as her lord, yet she acceded to his request.

Then Ahalya addressed Indra saying:

‘O Indra, I am highly gratified, now depart quickly, unobserved. O Chief of the gods, preserve me and thyself from Gautama.’

“Indra laughed and answered:

‘O You of beautiful waist, to-day I rejoice, I will now depart for my own region.’

On this, he sought to leave the hut of Ahalya.

“O Rama, at that instant he observed the Rishi Gautama entering the hut and he became agitated and anxious. Seeing the holy sage unconquered by devas or danavas, endowed with the power of Yoga, drenched with holy water, shining like fire, holding the sacred fuel and kusha grass in his hands, Indra was terrified and grew pale.

“Shri Gautama perceiving Indra in his own guise and judging by his guilty looks that he was leaving his spouse having committed sin with her, cursed him saying:—

“‘O Wicked Wretch, assuming my form, you have committed this sinful act. Be you impotent.’

Cursed by the Rishi Gautama, Indra was instantly deprived of his manhood.

Then the Sage Gautama cursed Ahalya also saying:

‘You shalt remain immovable in this place for thousands of years, your food the wind alone. You shalt be as dust, invisible to all creatures. When Rama, the son of Dasaratha visits this forest, then shalt you be cleansed from your sin. Having served him, O Deluded One without desire for personal gain, you shalt be restored to me in your present body.’

“Thus did the illustrious Gautama curse the wicked Ahalya and, abandoning the hermitage, began his yogic penances, on the beautiful peak of Himalaya, inhabited by siddhas.”