Coming to his senses, the minister Sumantra, overcome with anger, breathing heavily, grinding his teeth, wringing his hands, beating his head, his eyes growing red, his colour altered, showed every sign of distress. Perceiving the Queen Kaikeyi to have forfeited the king’s regard, Sumantra pierced her heart with words as keen as arrows, causing her to tremble. Penetrating to the most vulnerable parts of her being, Sumantra exposed the hidden defects of the queen by his barbed words.

He said: “O Lady, you have abandoned your husband the nourisher and supporter of the movable and immovable. There is nought undesirable in the world that you have not accomplished. I consider you the murderess of your husband and the destroyer of your family. By your vile deeds, you have smitten King Dasaratha, who is unconquerable, who resembles Indra and who is immovable as a mountain. O Kaikeyi, do not insult the aged king who has conferred these boons upon you. Obedience to her husband should, in a woman, far exceed the love of a thousand sons. It is the ancient tradition of this dynasty, that the eldest son succeed his father, but you seeks to revoke it and make your son ruler while the aged king still lives. Let your son Bharata rule the kingdom, we will follow Rama wheresoever he goes. No one of good report will remain to help your son in the administration, since you seeks to repudiate the immemorial usage. I wonder the earth does not open and swallow you for your misdeeds. Why do the holy sages not condemn you utterly? What fool cuts at the root of a sweet mango tree with his axe in order to plant a nimba tree in its place, which does not bear sweet fruit even if watered with milk. It is a common saying that honey does not flow from the nimba tree. I perceive you to be as wicked as your mother. The sins committed by your mother are known to me, I have heard of them on trustworthy report. Your father, by virtue of a boon granted to him by a Yogi, understood the language of all creatures; of every bird, he understood the voice.

Once, returning to the capital, he heard the converse between two ants and laughed, whereupon your mother grew wrath and threatened to take her life, saying:

‘I must know the cause of your laughter.’

The king replied, saying:

‘O Lady, if I tell you the cause of my laughter, it will undoubtedly lead to my death.’

Then your mother spoke to her husband, Kaikeya saying:

‘I care not if you livest or diest, tell me the cause of your laughter. If you were dead, you couldst not insult me with your laughter’.”

The king approaching the Yogi, told him the whole story, and the Yogi said: “O King, let your wife return to the house of her father or die, do not you reveal the secret to her.” Then King Kaikeya with a contented mind abandoned your mother, and lived free like Kuvera. O Sinful Queen, you also follows the evil path, deceiving the king and urging him to evil ways.

It is a true saying

‘The son follows the father and the daughter the mother’.

Do not follow your mother, but obey your husband, the king, our protector, by regarding his word. Cease to be ruled by evil and do not lead your husband into the way of unrighteousness. The king will not rescind the promise made to you. O Lady, entreat the king to bestow the crown on Rama who is the eldest son, who is generous, virtuous, a fulfiller of his duty, and a protector of all living beings. If Shri Rama goes to the forest, the whole world will speak ill of you. Let your mind be at peace and let Rama be crowned. If any other than Rama rule the kingdom, it will not profit you. If Rama becomes regent, then the king following the ancient tradition wjll doubtless retire to the forest.”

Thus did Sumantra with harsh words arraign the queen in the assembly, but Kaikeyi was in no wise moved, neither did she show any sign of repentance, nor did her countenance change.