Shri Rama and Lakshmana, the conquerors of their foes, having passed the night in Prayaga, offered obeisance to the sage and proceeded towards Cittrakuta. On their departure, Shri Bharadvaja gave them his blessing as a father blesses his son and addressing Rama, that hero of the region of truth, said:

“O Great One, proceeding west of the junction of the rivers, on the bank of the Yamuna, which flows into the swiftly-moving Ganga, you will find a worn-out ferryboat. Do you pass over the stream by means of a rod to which, at either end, an upturned pitcher is hung. On the opposite shore, you will behold a mighty green-leaved fig-tree surrounded by many others. The leaves of this tree are of a dark green hue and it is frequented by siddhas. Reaching that place, do you, with Janaki pray for the accomplishment of your legitimate desires. Rest there awhile, then pass beyond it; reaching Nilvan at a mile’s distance, there many sala, jamnu and badri trees are seen, that is the way to Cittrakuta and often have I journeyed on that path. Beautiful it is and free from thorns and there is no danger there of a forest fire.”

After pointing out the way to Shri Rama, the sage turned back to his own hermitage.

Offering salutations to the saint, Shri Rama, having taken his leave, said to Lakshmana: “O Lakshmana, surely we are fortunate in that the holy Rishi has treated us so graciously.”

Conversing thus, the two princes proceeded onwards, Shri Sita walking before them, and came to the bank of the swiftly-flowing Yamuna. Then they began to consider how they should pass over it, and collecting some wood constructed a raft, tying together lengths of dried bamboo and filling the interstices with kusha grass. Then Lakshmana, spreading the branches of jambu and vettas trees, made Sita a comfortable seat. Shri Sita shyly holding the hand of her lord, Shri Rama placed his Beloved on the raft with her clothing and ornaments beside her. Thereafter placing the axes and the chest covered with deerskins, containing their weapons there, the two brothers began to sail. Arriving in mid-stream, Shri Sita, bowing low, prayed to the holy river saying: “O Devi, forgive us for passing over you, grant that my lord may fulfil his vow without obstructions. When I return, to please you I will offer a thousand cows in charity.” Then with joined palms, she said: “May the Lord of the House of Ikshvaku return in peace to the capital.”

Having crossed the rippling Yamuna, the swift daughter of the sun, they reached its southern bank; there abandoning the raft, they entered the woods and the river bank and came to the heavily shadowed fig tree.

Shri Sita said: “O Mighty Tree, I make obeisance to you, may my lord fulfil his vow, so that I may again behold Shri Kaushalya and Queen Sumitra.”

Then Sita circumambulated the tree with reverence and Rama beholding the lovely Sita praying for his welfare, said to Lakshmana: “Do you go forward with Sita of whom no ill word has ever been uttered, who is ever obedient to me and is dearer than life itself. O Chief of Men, I, with my weapons will follow after. Whatever fruit or flower the daughter of Janaka may desire in the forest, do you gather for her, so that her mind may find delight.”

Shri Sita, between the two princes, walked like a female elephant guarded by two tuskers; the daughter of Janaka, beholding many things, formerly unknown to her, questioned Rama concerning every tree, shrub and climbing plant. Seeing many beautiful trees covered with blossom, Shri Lakshmana brought the princess all she desired. Viewing the river and its sandy banks caressed by the waves, where swans and cranes called, Shri Sita was filled with happiness.

Having travelled some distance, the two valiant brothers slew many deer for food, then, with Sita, passed through the pleasant woods, ringing with the cries of peacocks and frequented by elephants and monkeys.

Perceiving a delightful and sheltered place which found favour with Sita, they lodged there free from fear.