Shri Lakshmana, overcome with grief, addressed Mother Kaushalya in words suited to the occasion. He said: “O Mother, it cannot be pleasing to you that Rama, at the command of the king, who is subject to a woman, and oblivious of the prosperity of the kingdom, should go to the forest. Old age has impaired the intellect of the monarch who, impelled by desire, is no longer master of his senses; what words will he not utter? I see no fault in Ramacandra for which he should be exiled and deprived of his kingdom. I know no man whether friend or foe who can find fault with Rama even in absence. Like a god, he is guileless, self-controlled and forbearing even to his foes; what righteous king would abandon such a son without cause? What son versed in the discharge of a sovereign’s duties would give obedience to so puerile a king?”

Addressing Rama, Lakshmana continued: “O Brother, before the multitude become acquainted with these tidings, assume the reins of the kingdom, I will assist you in the undertaking. O Raghava, who will dare oppose you, when like death itself, I stand by your side, armed with my bow? If two or three, nay if all the people of Ayodhya resist you in thine undertaking, I will destroy them. If all the supporters of Bharata oppose you, not even one shall escape. The meek are ever oppressed. Should our father, inspired by Kaikeyi, become our enemy, then, though worthy of protection, I will undoubtedly slay him! Even should a spiritual preceptor, prompted by egoity, follow the evil path and do what ought not to be done, he must be restrained.

“On what authority does the king confer the kingdom on the son of Kaikeyi, when the son of the chief queen, rightly heir to the throne, still lives? O Slayer of your Foes, who will dare to incur our enmity and give Bharata the kingdom?

“O Mother, I swear by the truth, by my bow, by the laws of charity, by the merit acquired in worshipping the gods, that I am Shri Rama’s willing servant. O Devi, should Rama enter the blazing fire or the dark forest, know I shall have preceded him. O Goddess, do you and Shri Ramacandra behold my prowess by which I shall destroy all your sufferings, as the sun destroys darkness. I will also slay the king enslaved by Kaikeyi, who is aged, contemptible, of unsubdued mind and in his second childhood.”

Hearing the words of the noble Lakshmana, Queen Kaushalya was overcome with grief and said to Shri Ramacandra: “O Child, you knowest the content of your brother’s heart, now act as you considerest meet. It does not befit you to abandon your sorrow-stricken mother at the unjust words of her rival. O Righteous One, if you are established in dharma, then remain here, serve me and acquire virtue. There is no higher duty than service of the mother. I am, with the king, equally an object of your reverence, and I command you not to go to the forest. In your separation, there is no occasion for rejoicing, neither do I desire to live, but with you I will gladly live, sustaining myself on herbs alone. If you, leaving me afflicted with grief, go to the forest, then shall I refuse food and yield up my life. Then, O My Son, being responsible for my death you will, like Samudra, unmindful of your mother, enter hell.”

Seeing his mother, the Queen Kaushalya, thus lamenting, the righteous Ramacandra spoke to her dutifully, saying: “O Goddess, I cannot disregard my father’s commands, therefore I bow before you and entreat your favour and sanction to enter the forest. Know that the Sage Kandu, a great pundit, acquainted with his yogic duty, slew a cow in obedience to his father’s commands, knowing it to be a sin, which was thereafter not charged against him.

“In ancient times, likewise, in our own dynasty, the sons of King Sagara, digging the earth, sacrificed their lives at their father’s behest. At the command of his father, the son of Jamadagnya, Parasurama, with his axe, cut off the head of his mother Renuka. O Devi, these and other godlike men have obeyed their father resolutely. I, too, without hesitation, shall perform that which benefits my father. O Mother, not I alone obey my father but all those virtuous men, mentioned by me, have been obedient to their father’s will. I follow no new law, nor one contrary to the traditions of the royal dynasty, but tread the path of my illustrious ancestors. I am accomplishing nought which has not already been accomplished in this world. He who acts in accordance with his father’s commands does not fall from virtue.”

Having spoken thus to his mother, Shri Rama addressed Lakshmana, saying: “O Lakshmana, I am acquainted with thine immeasurable love for me, your valour and your prowess; none can withstand you. O Lakshmana, my mother endowed with every good quality is now subject to misery and grief through ignorance of dharma and lack of resignation. O Brother, dharma is the highest good on earth, Truth and dharma are one. My father’s command is founded on dharma, hence it is superior to my mother’s ruling. O Hero, it is unworthy in one seeking the supreme fruit of dharma, not to fulfil the promise made to his father, mother or a learned brahmin, I cannot, therefore, disregard my father’s command. O Hero, inspired by my father, Mother Kaikeyi has urged me to this course, therefore, O Lakshmana, relinquish the idea of bloodshed and embracing the state of virtue, follow me.”

Thus lovingly addressing Lakshmana, with bowed head and in great humility Rama turned to Queen Kaushalya and said: “O Goddess, now grant me permission to go into exile. In my absence pray for me. Having honoured my vow, I shall return, like King Yayati who falling to earth from heaven, again ascended thither. O Mother, comfort my unhappy father. Have no anxiety, O Mother, I shall return after fourteen years as desired by my father. Do you, Sita, Lakshmana and Sumitra obey my royal sire. This is the ancient tradition. O Mother, disregarding the preparations made for mine installation, let your mind be freed from grief and allow me to go into exile as ordained by dharma.”

Hearing the words of Rama, inspired by righteous motives, spoken with courage and equanimity, Queen Kaushalya as one restored to life, gazed steadfastly at Rama and said: “O My Son, if you are versed in dharma and art mindful of the good done to you by your parents, then am I as woithy of your respect as your father. O My Son, do not abandon thine unfortunate mother and enter the forest. O My Child, of what use is my life without you? The earth, the region of the pittris, heaven and the region of Mahaloka, which are the abodes of highest bliss, for me are all void without you. An hour with you is my greatest delight O My Son.”

Shri Rama, hearing his mother’s lament, was agitated, like a king who is perturbed, when on a dark night his torch-bearers are assailed on the way.

Then the dutiful Rama again addressed his mother rendered almost senseless with grief and Lakshmana distressed and disquieted, and spoke to them for their good, in words that were full of integrity:—

“O Lakshmana, I know of your prowess and the intensity of your devotion to me, but now in opposition to my purpose, you dost increase my mother’s misery. O Brother, there are three means to happiness in this world, they are righteousness, prosperity and pleasure. Those who love righteousness should pursue it as a wife acquires merit by being obedient to her husband, and pleasure by endearing herself to him and prosperity by becoming a mother. That undertaking which does not ensure these three, should be given up and that by which they are secured should be carried out. He who pursues prosperity alone, is without friends and has many enemies, and he who is devoted to pleasure, which is not based on righteousness, is an object of contempt. O Brother, the king is firstly our preceptor, secondly our father and thirdly he is an aged man. From the point of view of dharma, I must obey his commands, whether they are inspired by anger or desire. As a righteous man, I must fulfil his behests. Rare is the son so ruthless as to disobey his father. How can I evade the behests of my sire, who is my parent and has full authority over me as a king, and further is the consort of my dear mother Kaushalya? How, therefore, should the queen, abandoning the virtuous king, her lord, follow me like a widowed woman? O Goddess, grant me permission to leave for the forest whilst you dost recite the Peace Chant, that my vow may be accomplished.

“Like King Yayati of old who returned to heaven, inspired by his love of truth, I, too, shall return. O Mother, I dare not disobey my father for the sake of a mere kingdom! Life is brief and I have no desire for the rulership of the world through the sacrifice of virtue.”

The mighty Rama thus acquainting his mother with his intention of entering the forest as demanded by Kaikeyi, circumambulated the Queen Kaushalya, fixing his heart on his departure.