Hearing the harsh words uttered by Shri Vasishtha, Vishvamitra raising the fire weapon, cried: “Stay! Beware!”

Then Shri Vasishtha, lifting up his Brahma staff in wrath, exclaimed: “O Vilest of Warriors, here I stand, let loose all your weapons, not excepting those propelled by thought which you have obtained from the Lord Shiva. O Son of Gadhi, to-day I will deprive you of all these weapons. How can your power as a warrior compare with that of a divine sage? O Stupid Wretch, behold my divine energy!”

So saying, Shri Vasishtha quenched the dangerous fire weapon hurled at him by Vishvamitra as water quenches fire.

Then the son of Gadhi let fly other dangerous weapons upon the holy sage, the Varuna, the Rudra, the Indra, the Pashupata and Ishika weapons together with the Manava, Mohana, Gandharva, Swapana, Jrimbhana, Viadana, Santapana, and Vilapana; the Shoshana, Darana and the terrible Vatra; the Brahmapasha and Kalapasha, the Varunapasha and the priceless Pinaka and also the missiles Shushka and Ardra, the Danda weapon and the Pisacha, the Krouncha and the Dharmadiscus, the Kala discus and the discus of Vishnu, also the weapon Vayuvya, Mathana and Haya-shira did he discharge upon the great sage with the two Shaktis, the Kankala, Mushala, Vidyadhara, Kala, the trident Kapala and the Kankana. All these did he hurl at the holy sage.

Then Shri Vasishtha accomplished a great marvel and by means of his staff alone destroyed all the weapons of Vishvamitra. Seeing these weapons rendered ineffectual, Vishvamitra raised the Brahman-astra. At this, Agni, the divine sages and the celestial beings were seized with terror and the three worlds shook with fear. But by means of his spiritual power and the study and practice of Brahman-Vidya, Shri Vasishtha subdued the Brahman-astra. As Shri Vasishtha consumed this tremendous weapon, his charming and pleasing mien became terrible and from each pore of his body shafts of light shot forth while the staff of the holy sage, shining like fire, burst into flame.

All the sages now began to praise Shri Vasishtha, saying: “Your power is without equal and ever productive of good, by the power of your Yoga, pacify the Brahman-astra. O Holy Sage, you have humbled the pride of Vishvamitra. O Great Ascetic, be pacified, that we also may be delivered from fear.”

Thus addressed, Shri Vasishtha assumed his accustomed mien and Vishvamitra, being defeated, sighing heavily, exclaimed: “Woe, woe to the might of a warrior! The real power is the spiritual power. Shri Vasishtha by his spiritual strength has fully conquered mine. I will, therefore, abandon my warlike nature and seek to obtain brahmanhood.”