Seeing Lakshmana overcome with anger and desire for vengeance, Shri Rama sought to pacify him saying: “O Lakshmana, the learned warrior Bharata, fully armed, is coming to see us in person, of what value is shield or sword? What should I do with a kingdom obtained by slaying my brother Bharata, I having undertaken to fulfil my father’s behests? I will never accept riches obtained by the slaying of relatives and friends which would be as acceptable to me as food mixed with poison 1 O Lakshmana, I promise you, it is for the sake of my brothers that I desire to pursue virtue, legitimately acquired wealth, pleasures, and even the kingdom. O Lakshmana, I speak the truth, by this sign, touching my arms, ‘I desire a kingdom only for the sake of supporting my brothers and securing their good’. O Charming Prince! The acquisition of the kingdom is not difficult to me, but O, My Brother, I do not even desire dominion of the celestial region if it can only be acquired by unrighteous means! O Dear One! May the Deity of Fire consume all that gives me joy, if it is not for your good and to the advantage of Bharata and Shatrughna! It seems to me that when my dearest brother, ever devoted to me, returned to Ayodhya from the home of his maternal uncle, after hearing that we three, robed in bark had entered the forest, he, overwhelmed by affection and grief, set out hither to seek us I I see no other purpose for his advent here. Or it may be that Bharata, wroth with his mother has reproached her with bitter words and has come here to be reconciled with me. It is meet that Bharata should see me and I cannot believe that he comes as an enemy. What harm has Bharata ever done to us, O Brother, that to-day, you assumest him to be against us? It is improper for you to speak ill or harshly of Bharata. Those bitter things you sayest of Bharata, you have in fact said of me. O Son of Sumitra, how should a father slay his son, or a brother slay his brother, whatever betide? If you have said all this on account of the kingdom, then I will desire Bharata to give you the kingdom. O Lakshmana, if I say to Bharata ‘Give the crown to Lakshmana’, assuredly he will answer ‘Be it so’.”

Shri Lakshmana was profoundly humiliated by the words of Rama, his limbs and muscles contracted and he was sunk in shame. He said: “It appears that the Maharaja Dasaratha himself has come hither to see us.”

Seeing Lakshmana abashed, Shri Rama answered: “I also believe my father is come to see us, and will seek to take us home to the capital, knowing how grievously we suffer in the forest!”

“It may be, too, that the king, knowing Sita to be worthy of every happiness, will take her home. See, O Brother, two excellent horses of noble breed, swift as the wind, appear in view! The great and aged elephant Shatrunjaya that carries my illustrious father, marches before the army, but I feel apprehensive for I do not behold the white umbrella of my renowned Lord! O Lakshmana, descend from the tree.”

The prince having descended in obedience to Shri Rama, stood before him with joined palms.

Shri Bharata meanwhile commanded his army not to approach or disturb the hermitage of Rama. The army with its elephants and horses occupied an area of seven miles and the prudent Bharata who, to please Rama, had rid himself of all egoity and employed only virtuous means, caused it to take up its position at some distance from the Cittrakuta mountain.