Entering the vast Dandaka Forest, the invincible Rama, master of his senses, saw a circle of huts belonging to the ascetics, strewn with bark and kusha grass, blazing with spiritual effulgence scarce to be borne by mortal eye, as the noonday sun is a source of torment to men.

This retreat, a haven to all beings, the ground of which was carefully tended, was frequented by many deer and multitudes of birds and rendered gay by the dancing of troops of apsaras.

Beautiful with its spacious huts, where the sacred fire burnt, surrounded by ladles and other articles of worship such as skins, kusha grass, fuel, jars of water, fruit and roots; encircled by great and sacred forest trees, bowed with the weight of ripe and delectable fruits, the whole hermitage was hallowed by sacrificial offerings and libations and re-echoed to the recitation of Vedic hymns.

Carpeted with flowers of every kind, possessing pools covered with lotuses, it had been the retreat of former hermits, who subsisted on fruit and roots and who, wearing robes of bark and black antelope skins, their senses fully controlled, resembled the sun or fire. Now great and pious sages, practising every austerity, added to its lustre. Resembling the abode of Brahma, that hermitage resounded with the chanting of Vedic hymns, and brahmins, versed in the Veda, adorned it with their presence.

Beholding that sacred place, the illustrious Raghava, unstringing his bow, entered, and the august sages, possessed of spiritual knowledge, highly gratified, advanced to meet him.

Seeing that virtuous one, resembling the rising moon, with Lakshmana and Vaidehi of dazzling beauty, those ascetics of rigid vows received them with words of welcome and the dwellers in the wood were astonished at Rama’s handsome mien, his youthful appearance, majesty and graceful attire and, struck with wonder, gazed unwinkingly on Raghava, Lakshmana and Vaidehi, as on a great marvel.

Then, those blessed sages, engaged in the welfare of all beings, conducted Rama to a leaf-thatched hut, where, offering him the traditional hospitality, those fortunate and pious men, resembling fire itself, brought water that he might wash his hands and feet. Experiencing great delight, those high-souled ascetics, bidding him welcome, gathered flowers, fruit and roots, placing the whole content of the hermitage at the disposal of that magnanimous hero.

Thereafter, those ascetics, versed in the sacred lore, with joined palms addressed him, saying:—.

“O Raghava, a king is the defender of the rights of his people and their refuge; he is worthy of all honour and respect, he wields the sceptre, he is the Guru and partakes of a fourth part of the glory of Indra; he enjoys the highest prerogatives and receives every homage. We, being under your dominion, should be protected by you, whether living in the capital or the forest; you are our Sovereign, O Master of the World!

“Having renounced all desire for revenge, subdued anger and mastered our senses, do you protect us in the practice of virtue, as a mother protects the infant at her breast.”

With these words they paid reverence to Rama, who was accompanied by Lakshmana, offering him fruit, roots, flowers and every product of field and forest, whilst other ascetics, resembling the fire in lustre, observers of sacred vows, honoured the Lord according to tradition.