Hearing those words of Sita, the mighty Ravana, striking one hand on the other, revealed his gigantic form and, skilled in speech, addressed her, saying:—

“Methinks you have taken leave of your senses, hast you not heard of my great prowess and valour? Standing in space, I am able to lift up the earth; I can drink the waters of the ocean and destroy death himself in combat. With my shafts I can pierce the sun and cleave the terrestial globe. You, who dost allow thyself to be deceived by any trick and dost follow any whim, behold how I can change my shape at will.”

Speaking thus, Ravana, full of wrath, his eyes glowing like burning coals, resembled a flame, and discarding his benign aspect, he, the younger brother of Kuvera, assumed a terrible shape, resembling death itself.

With smouldering eyes, a prey to anger, resplendent in ornaments of fine gold, like a dark cloud, that Ranger of the Night appeared before her with his ten heads and twenty arms. Abandoning his ascetic disguise, the King of the Titans took on his native form; wearing a blood-red robe, he fixed that pearl among women, Maithili, with his gaze, thereafter addressing her, who resembled the sun, whose hair was dark and who was clothed in a robe and jewels, saying:—

“O Fair Lady, if you desirest a master famed throughout the Three Worlds, then surrender thyself to me. I am a husband worthy of you; do you serve me forever! I shall do you great honour nor will I ever displease you. Renouncing thine attachment to a man, place thine affection on me. What binds you to Rama, O You Foolish One who deemest thyself wise; he who has been banished from his domain, who has failed to fulfil his destiny and whose days are numbered, Rama, who on the injunction of a woman abandoned kingdom, friends and people to inhabit a forest frequented by wild beasts?”

Speaking thus to Maithili, who was worthy of tenderness and gentle of speech, that wicked titan, inflamed by passion, seized hold of her as Budha seizes Rohini. With his left hand he grasped the hair of the lotus-eyed Sita, and with his right, her thighs. Seeing Ravana with his sharp teeth like the peak of a mountain, resembling death itself, die Celestial Beings fled away in terror. Then instantly the great chariot belonging to Ravana, made of gold, to which braying mules were harnessed, appeared and, addressing Sita in harsh tones, he lifted her up and, clasping her, ascended the car.

Then the virtuous and unfortunate Sita, being overpowered by the titan, began to cry aloud, “Rama! Rama!” but he was far away in the depths of the forest. Though she possessed no love for him, Ravana, burning with passion, rose high into the air with her, as she struggled like the consort of the Indra of Serpents.

Seeing herself borne through the air by the King of the Titans, Sita with piercing shrieks, distracted with anguish, cried out: “O Lakshmana, you long-armed warrior, ever ministering to the satisfaction of your superiors, dost you not know that I am being carried away by a titan able to assume any shape at will? O Raghava you, who art willing to renounce life and happiness in the cause of duty, dost you not see that I have been borne away by one of unsurpassed wickedness? O You, the Scourge of Thine Enemies, art you not accustomed to punish evildoers? Why dost you not subdue the arrogance of this wicked titan? It is true that an evil deed does not bear fruit immediately, but time causes the grain to ripen.

“For this outrage, bereft of your senses by fate, you shalt, O Ravana, meet with a terrible retribution, bringing about thine end. Alas! The designs of Kaikeyi are crowned with success, since I, the virtuous consort of Rama am separated from that hero. I invoke Janasthana and the flowering Kami-kara trees, so that they may tell Rama speedily that Sita has been borne away by Ravana! I appeal to the Godaveri river, that re-echoes to the cry of cranes and swans, to inform Rama that Ravana has stolen Sita away! Offering salutations to the forest Deities, I call upon them to tell my lord of mine abduction! I beseech all creatures, whatever they may be, whether beast or bird or those that inhabit the forest, to make these tidings known to Rama and to tell him that his tender spouse, dearer to him than life, has been forcibly borne away by Ravana. Were death himself my ravisher, that mighty-armed one, hearing this report, would rescue me by his prowess!”

In the extremity of her grief, the large-eyed Sita, uttering this lament, observed the vulture Jatayu, perching on a tree. Thereupon beholding him, the beautiful Sita, borne away by Ravana, who was filled with carnal desire, cried out in piteous tones:—

“O Noble Jatayu, see how I am being ruthlessly carried off by the wicked King of the Titans, like a woman bereft of her protector. You will not be able to resist him, for this cruel and evil Ranger of the Night is powerful, arrogant and furnished 'with weapons. Nevertheless, O Bird, do you bear the tidings of mine abduction to Rama and Lakshmana and tell them all, omitting nothing.”