Hearing the words of King Janaka, Shri Vishvamitra said:—

“O King, let the bow be shown to Shri Rama.”

Then the monarch addressed his ministers, saying: “Go, bring the bow adorned with flowers and sandalwood, hither.”

The counsellors commanded by Janaka went to the capital and brought back the bow. Five hundred men, of great strength, brought the eight-wheeled cart on which the bow was placed. Having brought the chest fashioned of iron containing the bow, the ministers addressed their divine sovereign, saying: “O Chief of Men, here is the bow worshipped by former kings. O Sovereign of Mithila, it is at your disposal.”

Then, with palms joined in humility, King Janaka spoke to the holy Sage Vishvamitra standing with Rama and Lakshmana: “O Holy Lord, this is the bow which has been the object of worship to the kings of the Nimi dynasty and which the monarchs of the earth coming hither have sought to string. Even the gods have not been able to raise, bend or string this bow. How, therefore, should mortals have the power to do so if the gods have failed? O Great Rishi, behold the bow, let the two princes examine it.”

The righteous Sage Vishvamitra, hearing the words of the king, said to Rama: “O Child, view this divine bow.” Then Shri Rama, approaching the casket in which the bow lay, opened it and gazed upon it.

He said: “O Divine Lord, taking it in my hand and raising it up, I shall endeavour to string the bow.” Then the king and the sage answered: “Be it so,” and Shri Ramacandra with a slight effort, seizing the centre of the bow, lifted it up in the presence of thousands of people and without exertion drew it. By the unparalleled strength of the illustrious Rama, the bow broke into two parts and a sound resembling the fall of a thunderbolt rang forth cleaving the mountains asunder and causing the earth to shake, and on this the people on every side fell insensible, save only Vishvamitra, Rama and Lakshmana.

After a while, the people being somewhat restored, and the king’s misgivings set at rest, he addressed the excellent Sage with humility, saying: “O Blessed Lord, I have witnessed the unparalleled, wonderful and incontestable feat of Shri Ramacandra. My daughter, the Princess Sita, shall obtain Prince Rama as her lord and add to the glory of my dynasty. O Great Sage, to-day my pledge to subject the prospective wooer of my daughter to a trial of strength has been redeemed. Now I shall bestow on Rama, Sita, who is dearer to me than my life. With your permission, O Sage, my messengers in swift chariots shall drive in all haste to Ayodhya and respectfully relating this event to King Dasaratha invite him to my capital. They shall further inform him regarding the well-being of the two princes protected by you and with due honour, convey the great king hither.”

The Sage Vishvamitra acquiescing to the proposal, the king communicated the matter to his messengers and entrusting them with a personal missive to King Dasaratha, sent them forth on their deputation.