As he was proceeding to Pancavati, that descendant of Raghu observed a large and powerful vulture. Seeing that bird in the woods, the two illustrious princes, Rama and Lakshmana, thinking him to be a demon in another form, said to him: “Who art you?”

Then, in gentle caressing tones, the bird, as though addressing one dear to him, answered, saying: “Dear Child, know me to be the friend of your sire!”

In deference to this relationship, Raghava paid obeisance to him, and enquired of him concerning his name and lineage, and he, hearing Rama’s words, said:—

“In a former age there existed the Prajapatis, whom I will enumerate—the first of them was Kardama and immediately succeeding him was Vikrita, then came Shesha and Samshraya, the father of many powerful sons, thereafter came Sthanu, Marichi, Atri, Kratu who was full of energy, Paulastya, Angira, Praceta, Pulaha and Daksha followed by Vivasvat and Arishtanemi; O Raghava, the renowned Kashyapa was the last of these. O Hero of Infinite Renown, we have heard that Prajapati Daksha had sixty lovely and illustrious daughters. Kashyapa wedded eight of these damsels of elegant waist, Aditi, Diti, Kalika, Tamra, Krodhavasa, Manu and Anila and well pleased, said to them: ‘Do you all beget sons, like unto myself, who shall be Lords of the Three Worlds.’

“Thereupon Aditi consented, O Rama, as did Diti, Danu and Kalika, but the others refused.

“Aditi became the mother of the Thirty-three Immortals. O My Son, Diti gave birth to the illustrious Daityas; it was to them that the earth with its seas and forests belonged.

“Danu gave birth to a son named Ashagriva, O Subduer of your Foes, and Kalika gave birth to Naraka and Kalaka; and the five famous daughters, Kraunchi, Bhasi, Shyeni, Dhritarashtri and Shuki were produced by Tamra.

“Kraunchi begot the owls and Bhasi the vultures; Shyeni was the mother of the hawks and eagles possessed of great energy; Dhritarashtri, of swans, flamingoes and waterfowl.

“The beautiful Shuki begot Nata whose daughter was Vinata. O Rama, Krodhavasa brought forth ten daughters: Mrigi, Mrigimanda, Hari, Bhadramada, Matangi, Sharduli, Sheveta, Surabhi and Surasa, who were all endowed with beauty; finally Kadruka was born.

“O First of Men, Mrigi became the mother of all the deer; Mrigamanda begot bears, buffaloes and yaks.

“Bhadramada had a daughter named Iravati who was the mother of Airavata, who is the guardian of the world.

“Hari gave birth to powerful lions and monkeys, lovers of the forest; Sharduli begot chimpanzees and tigers. Of Matangi were born elephants, O Kakutstha, O Best of Men! Shiveta gave birth to the elephants who support the earth.

“Two daughters were born of the Goddess Surabhi: Rohini, and the auspicious Gandharvi.

“Rohini produced cows, and Gandharvi brought forth horses. Sarasa was the mother of the hooded serpents, O Rama, and Kadru gave birth to all other snakes.

“Manu, wife of the magnanimous Kashyapa, gave birth to men, Brahmins Kshattriyas, Vaisyas and Shudras, O Lion amongst Men.

“According to tradition, from her mouth were born the Brahmins, from her breasts the Kshattriyas, from her thighs the Vaishyas and from her feet the Shudras.

“All the trees with succulent fruits were born of Anala.

“Vinata, whose grandmother was Shuki, herself begot Kadru and her sister, Surasa.

“Of Kadru were born thousands of serpents, the supporters of the earth, and Vinata had two sons, Garuda and Aruna.

“Know that I was born of Aruna, as also was Sampati, my elder brother. My name is Jatayu, the descendant of Shyeni, O Subduer of Thine Enemies.

“O My dear Child, I will take up my abode in your vicinity, if you so desire it, and keep watch over Sita, whilst you are away with Lakshmana.”

Raghava, having often heard of his father’s friendship with the vulture, was filled with delight, and embraced him with affection, paying obeisance to him.

Having requested that powerful bird to keep watch over Sita, he went on towards Pancavati with him, accompanied by Lakshmana, firmly resolving to destroy his enemies and duly observing his daily devotions.