When the sacrifice of King Dasaratha had been brought to a successful conclusion, the gods, receiving their due portions, returned to their abode.

The king also, having fulfilled the obligations incurred by his initiation, returned to the capital with his queens, servants, army and vehicles.

The royal guests to whom due hospitality had been shown, made obeisance to the Sage Vasishtha and returned to their homes. When they departed, ornaments, apparel and gifts were distributed to their armies who set out for their own cities with joy.

King Dasaratha attended the departure of his guests and then re-entered the capital in a procession preceded by the holy brahmins.

Rishyasringa with his wife Shanta then took leave of the monarch and departed to his own city, King Dasaratha accompanying him for some distance. Then the king, expecting to be blessed with an heir, dwelt happily in Ayodhya.

Six seasons after the completion of the sacrifice, in the twelfth month, on the ninth day of the moon of Caitramas, the star Punarvasu was in the ascendant, and the planets, the Sun, Mars, Saturn, Jupiter and Venus were exalted, and those signs of the zodiac, such as the Ram, the Fishes, and the Scales in auspicious aspects, the moon and Jupiter being in conjunction at the period called Karka. Then the world-honoured Lord of the World, endowed with divine attributes, Shri Ramacandra was born of the womb of Kaushalya.

The Promoter of the glory of the House of Ikshvaku, the blessed Lord Vishnu was born as a son of Queen Kaushalya. When this child of limitless splendour was born, the queen looked most beautiful, like Aditi of old, favoured by Indra.

The hero of the realm of truth, Bharata, was born of Queen Kaikeyi. Possessed of every grace, he was endowed with a quarter of the glory of Shri Vishnu.

Sumitra gave birth to Lakshmana and Shatrughna, heroes skilful in the wielding of weapons and also partaking of Shri Vishnu’s glory.

Bharata was born when the star Pushya was in the ascendant in the Lagna Meena. During the ascendance of the star Shlasa in the Lagna Karka, at the time of sunrise Shatrughna was born.

Each of the sons of the king had special attributes and were endowed with great qualities, they were as resplendent as the Purva, Uttara and Bhadripata stars.

At that time gandharvas played divine melodies, nymphs danced, celestial drums were heard and the gods showered flowers from the sky.

Everywhere in the capital, signs of rejoicing were apparent; the streets were filled with actors and dancers and those who sang or played on various instruments.

The king gave gifts to the bards and ballad singers and conferred wealth and cows on the brahmins.

The four children were named on the twelfth day; the eldest son received the name Ramacandra, and the name given to the son of Queen Kaikeyi was Bharata.

The sons of Queen Sumitra were called Lakshmana and Shatrughna. The ceremony was performed by the holy Sage Vasishtha with great joy. After this, the brahmins of the capital and the country were feasted and presented with gifts and precious gems.

Resembling the deity Shri Brahma, the king showed universal benevolence. The princes grew in the knowledge of the Veda, in courage and active goodwill to all. Though each was wise, learned and possessed of every virtue, yet Shri Ramacandra excelled them in truthfulness and energy, and was beloved of all, like the flawless orb of the moon. Expert in mounting the elephant, the horse and the chariot, he was skilful in archery and devoted to the service of his parents.

Shri Lakshmana cherished an exceeding love for his elder brother Shri Ramacandra, the delight of the world, and Shri Rama loved him also as his very self. Shri Ramacandra loved Lakshmana who was endowed with every excellent quality, as his own life, and neither slept nor partook of any nourishment without the other.

When Raghava mounted on horseback, engaged in the chase, Shri Lakshmana followed with bow and arrows to protect him.

Emulating the example of Shri Ramacandra, Bharata loved Shatrughna and was loved by him with equal affection.

The monarch was as pleased and satisfied with his four sons as is Shri Brahma with the four Vedas. Observing the wisdom, prudence and modesty of his children, who were endowed with every great attribute, King Dasaratha derived as great a delight from them as Brahma from the four guardians of the earth.

The princes studied the Veda with perseverance, affectionately attended on the king and acquired proficiency in the use of arms.

One day when the illustrious sovereign was in council with his relatives, ministers, and learned preceptors, deliberating on the marriage of his four sons, the great Sage Vishvamitra appeared in the capital. Seeking an audience with the king, he addressed the doorkeeper, saying: “Inform the king speedily that the son of Gadhi of the race of Kaushika is at the gate.” The awe-stricken guard hastened to the royal apartment and conveyed the tidings with due respect to his majesty, who with his Guru Vasishtha went forth to welcome the sage at the gate and bring him into the royal palace.

As Brahma welcomes Indra, so did they greet the muni, and beholding that resplendent and mighty ascetic, the observer of great vows, of cheerful countenance, the king offered him arghya according to the prescribed tradition.

The virtuous Vishvamitra then enquired of the king concerning the welfare of the empire, the prosperity of his people, relatives and friends and also as to the state of the royal treasury. Thereafter, the sage questioned the monarch further, saying: “Are your vassals obedient to you? Are thine enemies subdued? Are the Vedic sacrifices duly observed in your dominion? Are strangers entertained with fitting hospitality?” Then after enquiring as to the well-being of Shri Vasishtha and other sages, Shri Vishvamitra entered the palace.

Here the king once more paid him reverence and with delight addressed him saying: “O August Sage, your coming has caused me as great a joy as the acquisition of ambrosia or the advent of rain falling on the parched earth. O Sage, your approach is as grateful to me as the birth of a son to one without an heir or the recovery of his wealth to one who imagined it to be irretrievably lost. O Mighty Sage, I welcome you with my whole heart, say what commands you have for me? When your glance does fall upon me, O Sage, I become righteous and acquire merit; to-day my life is rendered fruitful and the purpose of my birth is accomplished since you have visited me. O Auspicious One, formerly you wast a warrior sage, illustrious by virtue of your sacred practices, but now you are become a brahmin and art worthy of supreme worship by me. Thine advent has conferred purity and blessing on me, and by your sacred presence both the kingdom and I have been purged of every offence. Be pleased to tell us of the purpose of your coming, I desire to manifest my gratitude to you by rendering you service. O Kaushika, do not hesitate to speak your will, I am ready to do anything for you; you are to me as a god. O Brahman Seer, by beholding you, I have acquired the great merits of a pilgrimage.”

Hearing the words of King Dasaratha, sweet sounding and in accordance with the scriptural injunctions, the great sage, the repository of all excellent qualities, was highly gratified.