Smiling a little, Rama, in gently mocking tones, answered Shurpanakha, who had been caught in the noose of love, saying:—

“I am already wedded and this is my beloved consort; the rivalry between co-wives would prove unbearable 1 My younger brother however who is of a happy disposition, of agreeable appearance, virtuous and chaste, is called Lakshmana and is full of vigour. He has not yet experienced the joys of a wife’s company and desires a consort. He is youthful and attractive and would therefore be a fitting husband for you. Take my brother as your lord, O Lady of large eyes and lovely hips, and enjoy him without a rival, as Mount Meru, the sunlight.”

Hearing these words, the Rakshasi, blinded by passion, leaving Rama, at once addressed Lakshmana, saying:—

“My beauty renders me a worthy wife for you; therefore come and we will range the Dandaka Forest and mountains happily together.”

Thus accosted by the Rakshasi Shurpanakha, Lakshmana, the son of Sumitra, skilled in discourse, smiling, gave this ingenious reply:—

“How canst you wish to become the wife of a slave, such as I? I am wholly dependent on my noble brother, O You whose complexion resembles the lotus, who art pleasing to look upon and chaste? O Lady of large eyes, you are a paragon, do you become the consort of that matchless hero. Renouncing that ugly, evil and peevish old woman, whose limbs are deformed, he will certainly devote himself to you 1 O Lady of ravishing complexion and lovely limbs, what sensible man would sacrifice that unrivalled beauty of thine for an ordinary woman?”

Thinking Lakshmana’s words to be sincere and not understanding his jest, that cruel and misshapen Rakshasi, in the blindness of her passion once more addressed Rama, the Scourge of His Foes, who was seated in the leaf-thatched hut with Sita, and said:—

“Is it for this hideous, evil and peevish woman, who is old and deformed, that you dost slight me?

“I shall devour her in your presence to-day, and shall live happily with you without a rival.”

Speaking thus, the Rakshasi, whose eyes blazed like torches, hurled herself in fury on Sita, like a great meteor descending on the planet Rohini.

Then the mighty Rama restrained her, as, like the noose of death, she advanced towards Sita, and in anger addressed Lakshmana, saying:—

“It is unwise to taunt those beings who are vile and cruel, O Saumitri. Take heed, see, Vaidehi is in danger, O Friend! Do you maim this hideous demon of protruding belly, who is evil and filled with fury.”

The valiant Lakshmana, highly incensed against the Rakshasi, thereupon drew his sword from its scabbard and, in the presence of Rama, cut off her ears and nose.

Her ears and nose severed, Shurpanakha uttered a terrible cry and ran into the forest. Being mutilated, the Rakshasi, streaming with blood, created a terrible uproar, like a tempest in the rainy season and, dripping with blood, that hideous monster, lifting up her arms, plunged howling into the deep woods.

Thereafter the injured Shurpanakha sought out her brother Khara of great might, who, surrounded by a troop of demons, was seated in Janasthana and threw herself on the ground before him, like a meteorite falling from heaven.

Wild with terror and covered with blood, Khara’s sister, almost deprived of her senses, related everything concerning Raghava’s arrival in the forest with his consort and Lakshmana and the circumstances of her disfigurement.