Shri Rama, patiently giving ear to the utterance of Javali, replied with a due sense of judgment and in words based on his belief that those duties enjoined in the Vedas, should be fulfilled. “O Muni, that which you have spoken with the desire to please me, is not authorized, nor are your admonitions just, since, even the most cursory analysis proves them to be false. O Sage, in the assembly of the good, men who are not self-subdued and who are wanting in integrity and those who act contrary to what is ordered by the scriptures, are not honoured. It is his conduct that renders man virtuous, a coward or a hero and transmutes impurity to purity. Should I embrace error and abandon the authority of my elders, relinquishing rectitude and honour, as also moral conduct and the Vedic ordinance, then I, conforming to your beliefs and sacrificing prudence, would forfeit the respect of wise and virtuous men.

“Following your counsel, were I to cease to pursue the way of truth and tread the lower path, by what means should I attain heaven? Were I to depart from the moral code, then every man might act according to his inclination, since the subject mirrors the king, in action.

“Above all, a sovereign should manifest probity, benevolence, his chief duty being to uphold truth; truth is verily the kingdom, by truth is the world supported.

“The gods and sages esteem truth as the highest principle. He who utters truth attains the supreme state. Men fear a liar as they do a venomous serpent, truth is the root of all felicity and the support not only of this world, but the best means of attaining heaven!

“Whatever is offered in sacrifice, whatever austerity is undertaken has its foundation in truth, so the Vedas declare, hence truth is the most sacred of all things.

“One maintains a family, another governs the whole world, another falls into hell, another attains heaven in accordance with the fruit of his actions! Acquainted with the law of Karma founded on truth, ought I not to prove my sire a devotee of that truth? Why should not I, who have pledged my word, follow that which I have accepted as truth? Honouring my father’s vow, I shall never abandon the way of truth either for the sake of governing a kingdom or through being misled by others or through ignorance or anger. Hast you not heard that neither the Gods nor the ancestors receive the offerings of one who is irresolute, infirm of purpose and false to his word?

“I hold truth as the supreme virtue of mankind. I desire to reverence that truth upheld by men of old. Should I follow the duty of a warrior, I should be unjust. To do that which is false is worthy only of mean, covetous and depraved souls. Should I pursue that crooked path, indicated by you, then I should perpetrate falsehood, through the mind, the body and the soul. Those who uphold truth acquire land, renown, fame, and heaven also; therefore, let all men utter truth and act according to truth I

“That which you, after much deliberation, believest to be true, and recommendest to me is wholly improper. O how can I disregard the command of my sire, that I should reside in the forest? When I pledged my word in the presence of my father, to enter the forest, Queen Kaikeyi was rendered glad at heart, how should I now give her cause for distress?

“Giving up falsehood and deceit, differentiating between what should and should not be done, subduing the senses, possessed of full faith in the Vedic injunctions, I shall devote myself to the fulfilment of my father’s will!

“By sacrifice, one acquires the state of Indra and enters heaven. The sages by virtue of sacrifice have gone thither.”

The illustrious and glorious Ramacandra, highly displeased by the materialistic arguments of Javali spoke thus in terms of refutation and reproof: “O Javali, by speaking the truth, by pursuing the duties of their caste and station, by manifesting their valour in time of need, by gentle speech, by service of their spiritual preceptor, the gods and unexpected guests, men attain heaven! Therefore, those brahmins instructed in truth, pursue virtue with a single mind in accordance with their caste and station and eagerly await their entrance to Brahmaloka. O Javali, I perceive with regret the action of my illustrious parent in permitting one of atheistic ideas, who has fallen from the path of rectitude enjoined in the Vedas, to remain in his court. Those who preach the heretical doctrine of the Charvaka school, are not only infidels, but have deviated from the path of truth. It is the duty of a monarch to deal with such persons as with felons, nor should men of understanding and learning stand in the presence of such atheists.

“O Javali, those versed in wisdom, who preceded you, performed many holy acts by virtue of which they acquired eminence here and in the spiritual realm. Those sages have ever practised harmlessness, truth, asceticism, charity, benevolence and sacrifice.

“O Javali, those who fulfil their spiritual duty, who are the foremost in deeds of charity, and who harm none, who frequent the assemblies of the good and are revered by all men, they are without sin, their name shall live for ever as that of our illustrious Guru, Shri Vasishtha.”

Rama, having uttered these harsh words to Javali, he, with humility addressed Rama saying: “O Rama, I am no atheist; on this occasion, I assumed this atheistical disguise in order to turn you from your purpose and persuade you to return to the capital!”