A prey to grief on account of Sita’s abduction, Rama, resembling the Fire of Dissolution, sought to bring about the destruction of the Worlds.

With burning sighs he contemplated the stringed bow, as Hara at the end of the world-cycle stands ready to consume the universe.

Seeing Rama transported with rage, hitherto never manifested by him, Lakshmana, his features pale with terror, addressed him with joined palms, saying:—

“Formerly you were ever gentle, of controlled mind and devoted to the welfare of all beings, do not now give way to wrath and renounce your true nature. As the radiance of the moon, the brilliance of the sun, the velocity of the wind and the forbearance of the earth, so is your glory manifested without equal and without end. Wherefore dost you seek to destroy the worlds on account of one man’s sin?

“It is not yet known to whom this shattered chariot belongs nor because of whom nor between whom, the struggle, of which we see the traces, took place. This spot bears the marks of wheels and feet and is sprinkled with drops of blood; it is the scene of a desperate struggle, O Son of a King, but it is a fight between single combatants, O Most Eloquent of Men! I see no trace of a great army and it is not fitting that you should destroy the worlds on account of one man.

“Kings should always rule with justice, gentleness and moderation. You wast ever the refuge of all beings and their supreme asylum. Who would condone the bearing away of your consort, O Raghava? Rivers, seas, mountains, Gods, Gandharvas and Danavas have no desire to displease you, even as the officiating priest will not harm the one undertaking a sacrifice after he has performed the preparatory rites.

“O Prince, it is for you to seek out Sita’s abductor, followed by the great sages and by me with my bow. We will search the ocean, the hills, the forests, the deep caves and innumerable lakes filled with lotuses. We will enquire of the Gods and Gandharvas in every region, until we find the captor of your consort. If the Chiefs of the Gods do not restore your wife peaceably, then, O King of Koshala, adopt those measures that you considerest fitting. If, through gentleness, humility and prudence, you dost not regain your spouse, O Indra among Men, then let loose thine innumerable golden-tipped arrows, resembling Mahendra’s thunderbolts.”