Then Shri Bharata, fully reconciled, taking the sandals from the head of the elephant, placed them on his own and ascended the chariot with Shatrughna, Shri Vasishtha, Vamadeva and Javali of firm vows, with all the sagacious counsellors preceding him. Circulating the Mount Cittrakuta, they proceeded towards the east, by the river Mandakini, where they beheld countless veins of metal.

Shri Bharata with his army, went forward and at a short distance from Cittrakuta, perceived the hermitage in which the holy Bharadvaja and other sages dwelt. Approaching the hermitage of the Sage Bharadvaja, Shri Bharata having dismounted from his chariot, offered salutations to him. Bharadvaja, full of joy, said to Bharata: “O Friend, hast you beheld Shri Rama? Is your purpose accomplished?”

Shri Bharata, ever devoted to his brother, answered the sage, saying: “O Lord, I and the holy Guru Vasishtha besought Rama to return, but he cheerfully replied: ‘My father’s decree that I should reside in the forest for fourteen years, shall be faithfully observed by me’.”

Then the learned and eloquent Shri Vasishtha, skilled in wisdom, addressed Shri Rama in this wise: “O Wise One, be pleased to bestow your sandals, adorned with gems, on your deputy. Do you bear the good of the capital in your heart.

Shri Rama, in obedience to his holy Guru, turning towards the east, put on the sandals and thereafter delivered them to me.

“Now, frustrated in my design to bring back Shri Rama, I am returning to Ayodhya with these sandals.”

The Maharishi Bharadvaja, then uttered these auspicious words: “O Prince, versed in the knowledge of virtue, thine excellence is as little a source of wonder, as water ever flowing towards a hollow. King Dasaratha, possessed of a righteous and duty-loving son, such as you are, has surely found immortality.”

Shri Bharata, touching the feet of the holy rishi, in great reverence, with joined palms, circumambulated him and then, with his counsellors, proceeded to Ayodhya.

The army following Prince Bharata, some riding elephants, some horses, and some in bullock carts, crossed the Yamuna with its singing waves and came to the sacred waters of the Ganges.

Having crossed the holy river Ganga, with his companions, Shri Bharata entered the town of Shringavera and from there passed on to Ayodhya. Beholding Ayodhya, a stricken city, deserted by his father, King Dasaratha and his brother Shri Ramacandra, Prince Bharata, deeply distressed, said to his charioteer: “Behold the ruined capital bereft of its former glory, unadorned and lacking all signs of festivity! How silent, how wretched is this city, formerly so full of life.”