Hearing the laudatory and admirable words of that Lion among lungs, Dasaratha, the great Sage Vishvamitra answered: “O Great King, who in the world save one of the House of Ikshvaku, instructed by Shri Vasishtha, could give tongue to such utterances? O Illustrious Monarch, I will now unfold my purpose, do you fulfil it and prove the truth of your words.

“O Chief of Men, when I undertake the observance of sacred sacrifices to enhance my perfection, two rakshasas, adepts in magic, create great impediments. When, after long effort, the sacrifice approaches consummation, then these two rakshasas, Marica and Suvahu destroy the rite and defile the altar with blood and flesh. My holy endeavours being thus frustrated, I become despondent and leave the place of sacrifice. O King, it is not permitted to me to show wrath when engaged in sacrifice, and I therefore refrain from cursing them. Do you lend me the services of your son, Shri Ramacandra, the truthful, the brave, that hero, whose locks fall on his cheeks.

“Under my protection, he will destroy those mischievous rakshasas and I will confer great blessings on him. I will instruct him for his good in many sciences and he will become famous in the three worlds. The rakshasas will not be able to stand against Rama and no one else can destroy them. They are proud and powerful, but now, owing to their sins, their destruction is imminent, they will not be able to withstand Shri Ramacandra,

“Do not allow a father’s affection to overcome you; I assure you that in the presence of Shri Ramacandra, the rakshasas are as good as slain. Rama’s virtues are known to Shri Vasishtha and other ascetics. O King, if you seeks everlasting renown and merit in this world, then let Shri Rama go with me. Seek the advice of Shri Vasishtha and your counsellors and if they approve the project, give me Ramacandra. Be pleased, O King, to give up your beloved son for the space of ten days, so that I may complete the sacrifice. O King, help me in furthering my sacrifice, and do not let the allotted time pass in vain. Do what is auspicious, do not grieve.”

The upright and resplendent Sage Vishvamitra having uttered these righteous words, became silent.

The words of Shri Vishvamitra filled the king with anxiety and he became distraught. Because of these inexorable words, the monarch trembled and fell unconscious from his seat overcome with grief.