Then King Dasaratha, deeply distressed on account of his vow, addressed the weeping Sumantra, saying: “O Sumantra, prepare four divisions of the army laden with wealth to accompany Shri Rama. Let beautiful and eloquent women and merchants follow in his train, together with rich traders who can set up stores stocked with those things necessary for the army of Shri Rama. Let those personal attendants pleasing to Rama, having received abundant wealth, accompany him. Let chosen citizens accompany Rama with instruments of war and vehicles, and those who know the forest paths, go also. Shri Rama hunting the deer and elephants, drinking fresh honey and enjoying the beauty of the rivers will call those left behind to remembrance. Let all my wealth and grain be sent with Rama to the uninhabited forest. Observing sacrifices with the sages in sacred places, bestowing alms upon them, Shri Rama will dwell there happily. Prince Bharata will govern the people here and Rama set out abundantly provided.”

Kaikeyi was seized with fear on hearing the words of the king, her mouth dried up and she was unable to speak. Trembling with agitation, she then said: “O Chief of men, Bharata will not accept the kingdom stripped of its wealth and people, resembling unfermented wine.”

The eyes of the king reddened with anger at the cruel and shameless words of Kaikeyi, and he replied: “O Wicked Wretch, why dost you seek to crush me with this load of sorrow? When you didst demand Rama’s exile, you didst not add he should go empty handed?”

At the king’s words, the fury of Kaikeyi was redoubled, and she said: “Of your dynasty, King Sagara sent his son Asumanjas into exile. Let Rama depart in the same manner.”

At these words, King Dasaratha cried, “Woe, alas!” and all the people felt ashamed, but Kaikeyi remained unmoved. Then the chief minister, Siddhartha by name, a virtuous man, much favoured by King Dasaratha, addressed Kaikeyi, saying: “O Lady, Asumanjas, seizing the children playing in the street, threw them into the river Sarayu, for this he was considered an exceedingly wicked man.

The people of the city, disgusted with his cruel deeds, entreated King Sagara to banish him, saying:

‘Will you preserve us or Prince Asumanjas in the city?’

King Sagara enquired of them the cause of their fear and they said in reply:

‘Prince Ansumanjas has become insane, catching our children while at play and throwing them into the river; he rejoices in this act.’

King Sagara, therefore, abandoned his malevolent son and placing him on a carriage with his wife, clothing and other necessities, proclaimed:

‘Asumanjas is banished for life.’

Asumanjas, armed with an axe and basket, wandered about in the forest and reaped the fruit of his evil deeds. The righteous Maharajah Sagara banished his son on account of his evil conduct but, O Queen, what wrong has Rama done that he should be exiled by you? I see no fault in Rama. It were as easy to find a taint in the moon! O Lady, if you have found any fault with Rama, then declare it openly and he will be banished from the kingdom. O Kaikeyi, it is an unrighteous act to abandon one following the path of virtue, without substantial reason; such an act would destroy the splendour of Indra himself. O Lady of Beautiful Countenance, do not destroy the prosperity of Shri Ramacandra and become a source of ignominy to the people.” Hearing the words of the minister Siddhartha, King Dasaratha, overcome with grief, spoke to Kaikeyi, in broken accents and said: “O Sinful One, dost you disregard the words of my minister? Art you blind to thine own welfare and mine? Art you determined to follow the evil path? Giving up my wealth and substance and the comforts of the palace, I will follow Rama. Do you rule at ease with Bharata for ever.”