The night being past, Shri Rama, slowly waking, roused the sleeping Lakshmana and addressed him, saying: “O Lakshmana, how beautiful are the parrots, cuckoos, mainas and other birds which are heard here 1 O Parantapa, this is the hour to pursue our journey, let us go hence, O Prince!”

Shri Lakshmana, renouncing sleep, shook off his drowsiness and rose refreshed. All of them rising and bathing in the river Yamuna, offered up their morning prayers. Then, taking the path through the palasa forest, they proceeded towards Cittrakuta as directed by the holy sage.

Walking with Lakshmana, Rama now spoke to the lotus-eyed Sita, saying: “O Daughter of King Videha, see how the spring has dressed the palasa trees in sweet-scented blossom, these crimson flowers glowing like fire and the branches decked with flowers as if adorned with garlands. How rich in bloom are the bilva trees untouched by man who is not able to approach them. Here we can easily gather food. See, O Lakshmana, hanging on the trees, the honeycombs at least a drona in size, covered with bees. How charmingly the waterbird is singing and the peacock answering with its call, and look! the earth is half concealed with flowers. Here are the lofty peaks of Cittrakuta where countless birds sing and herds of elephants wander. Somewhere on Cittrakuta a level field must lie midst groves of trees, a pure and stainless place, where we will dwell.”

The two brothers, in company with Sita, conversing thus, reached the pleasant and captivating mountain of Cittrakuta. Coming to that place, on which there were birds of many kinds, abounding in various roots and pleasant fruits and dear transparent pools, Rama said to Lakshmana: “O Gentle Brother, how pleasant is this hill covered with shady trees, creepers and fruits of many kinds, appearing delightful and where we may abide unmolested. Within the forest, many sages dwell, this place is meet to be our hermitage.”

Thus resolving, Rama, Lakshmana and Sita came to the hermitage of the Sage Valmiki and, with reverence, offered obeisance to him. The virtuous sage, full of joy, paid homage to them, asking them to be seated saying: “You are most wdcome!”

Shri Rama, presenting himself together with his brother and Sita, rdated the cause of his exile to the sage and then addressed Lakshmana, saying: “O Brother, bring strong wood and let us build a hut in this place. O Excellent Prince, here do I wish to dwell.”

Shri Lakshmana thereupon brought many pieces of wood, hewn from the trees, and erected a hut thatched with leaves. When Shri Rama beheld that firm and pleasant hut furnished with a door, he said to the devoted Lakshmana: “O Lakshmana, bring venison with which we may worship the deity of the dwelling-place I Since we purpose to live here long, we should enter it with peaceful intention! O Son of Sumitra, having killed a black deer, bring it here speedily. Let us follow the scriptural ordinance in this matter.”

Shri Lakshmana, having obeyed his brother’s command, Rama said: “Now dress the meat and we will offer it as a sacrifice. Hasten, O Brother, this is an auspicious hour.”

The illustrious son of Sumitra slew a black antelope and roasted it in the flames. When it was dressed and the blood drained from it, Lakshmana addressed Raghava, saying: “O Godlike One, I have prepared the flesh of the black deer, now offer up the sacrifice to propitiate the god.”

The devout and resplendent Rama, skilled in silent prayer and sacrifice, having bathed, recited the holy texts, offering homage to the gods, then entered the hut, his heart filled with joy. Having adored Rudra and Vishnu for the purification of the dwelling, he read the Peace Chant and other propitiatory prayers. Repeating the japa and bathing in the river, he offered oblations for the expiation of sins. He then erected altars in the eight directions for the worship of different gods and gratifying the deities presiding over the elements with offerings of flowers, garlands, fruits, cooked meats and the recitation of Vedic mantrans, he, together with Sita, entered the delightful hut, thatched with leaves, set up in a suitable place, sheltered from the wind.

Shri Rama, of subdued senses, dwelt happily in that habitation, built in the forest, the abode of beasts and birds, abounding in trees and flowers, where elephants wandered and the cries of wild beasts re-echoed.

Living on the pleasant mountain, Cittrakuta, by the banks of the river Malati, Rama forgot the capital and remembered his renunciation no more.