Shri Rama overcome with grief, touched the feet of his sovereign and bowing down, with Lakshmana and Sita, circumambulated the king. Having taken leave of his sire, Rama with Sita paid reverence to the sorrow-stricken Queen Kaushalya.

Then Shri Lakshmana bowed before the Queen Kaushalya and embraced the feet of his mother Sumitra. His mother weeping, desiring her son’s good, blessed Lakshmana and said: “O My Son, Shri Rama was born of Queen Kaushalya for the protection of the world, and I have borne you so that, devoted to Shri Rama, you should accompany him to the forest. O My Son, do not neglect the service of Shri Rama. O Sinless One, whether in fortune or in adversity, regard him as your life! It is the duty of the good to be subject to their elders. The tradition of your dynasty is the giving of charity, the performance of sacrifice, death on the field of battle and implicit regard for thine elders.”

Speaking thus, Sumitra seeing Rama ready to depart for the forest, again and again exhorted Lakshmana in this wise: “O My Son, enter the forest with Rama. O Child, have no anxiety, do not grieve either for your father, mother, home or country, esteem Rama to be Dasaratha, Janaki as myself and the forest equal to Ayodhya.”

Sumantra now addressed Rama with humility as Matali addresses Indra: “O Illustrious Prince, be pleased to mount the chariot, I will take you wheresoever you desirest. Let the period of thine exile enjoined by Kaikeyi begin to-day.”

Then the beautiful daughter of King Janaka, adorned with the jewels, bestowed on her by the king, cheerfully mounted the waiting vehicle, which shone like the sun. Shri Rama and Lakshmana also swiftly ascended the chariot enriched with gold and weapons.

Having regard to the period of exile, King Dasaratha had bestowed on his daughter-in-law, robes and jewels and ordered arms and mantra-charged weapons, armour and shields to be placed on the chariot. Seeing that all were mounted, Sumantra set the chariot in motion guiding the horses swift as the wind. Rama having started for the Dandaka forest, the whole city, young and old, men and women, soldiers, elephants and horses, distracted and full of indignation and distress, became as beings demented. The loosing of elephants, and the loud neighing of horses filled Ayodhya with tumult and ferment. Young and old, distraught, ran after the chariot of Rama as men overpowered by the sun plunge into water. Some running beside the royal car, some behind looking up towards Rama, others weeping and lamenting, cried to Sumantra: “O Charioteer, drive slowly, draw in your steeds, so that we may see the face of Rama so soon to be hidden from us. Surely the heart of his mother must be made of steel that it did not break on seeing the godlike prince departing for the forest. Great indeed is Shri Sita, who follows her husband like a shadow, as the light of the sun that never forsakes the Meru mountain. O Lakshmana, perfect art you, constantly serving thine amiable and godlike brother. This is perfection, this is prosperity, thus to attend your brother is the way to heaven.”

Thus lamenting, following the chariot of Rama, the people could not restrain their tears. The afflicted and wretched monarch, King Dasaratha, overcome with grief, coming forth from the palace barefooted, surrounded by his queens, cried out: “I must again behold my beloved son.” Then he heard the lament of the women wailing like she elephants when their mates are bound in chains, and like the full moon in eclipse, King Dasaratha was bereft of his splendour.

Shri Rama, free from anxiety, urged the charioteer on, saying: “Faster! faster!” and as he spoke, enjoining Sumantra to drive more speedily, the people cried, “Stay, stay”, so that the charioteer knew not how to obey both commands. The dust raised by the wheels of Rama’s chariot was laid by the tears of the people. As Shri Rama left the city, the people weeping and bewildered were distraught, the tears of the women falling like drops of water on lotus leaves, when fishes leap. The people following Rama’s chariot and perceiving the anguish of the king, wept in sympathy. A great tumult now arose from the ladies of the palace and the king’s attendants all weeping and crying, “O Rama! O Kaushalya!” and hearing the wailing and lamentation of the people Shri Rama looked back and beheld the king and his mother Kaushalya, barefooted, following his chariot, and was filled with sorrow. Shri Rama, bound by the cord of duty, turned his eyes from his parents, as a foal not permitted to follow its dam. Perceiving his royal parents, unacquainted with suffering, worthy of excellent chariots, running barefooted towards him, he said to Sumantra: “Drive on speedily!” unable to bear the sight of his parents’ distress, as an elephant is unable to bear the goad. His mother Kaushalya trembling and tottering, ran towards him, like a cow hearing the cries of her calf that has been bound, crying, “O Rama! O Sita! O Lakshmana!” The king calling, “Stay! Stay!” to the charioteer, with Rama crying, “Go forward speedily”, caused the heart of Sumantra to be riven, like one standing between two rival armies.

On this, Rama addressed him, saying: “On your return to the palace, when charged by the king with disobeying his commands, do you say: ‘Amidst the noise of the rolling wheels, I was unable to hear.’ Further delay will prove calamitous.” Shri Sumantra regarding the words of the prince, signalling the people following to return, urged the horses on.

The chariot outstripping the king, caused him to halt with his household and mentally circumambulating Rama, he returned to the palace. The courtiers now said to the king: “None follows a friend far, whom he wishes to see return.” King Dasaratha hearing this injunction, bathed in perspiration, utterly wretched, stood gazing at the receding chariot.