When her lord, the Joy of the House of Raghu, having obtained the permission of Sutikshna was proceeding on his way, Sita, in gracious and gentle tones, addressed him saying:—

“Though you are noble, a small defect by imperceptible degrees becomes great, but it is always possible to eschew evil, born of desire. There are three failings, born of desire; the first is the uttering of falsehood, but the other two are of graver significance, namely, association with another’s wife and acts of violence committed without provocation.

“O Raghava, falsehood was never, nor could ever be, your weakness; nor yet, O Indra among Men, couldst you, even in thought, covet another’s wife; this fault, destructive of virtue, was never thine, O Son of a King! You have ever centred thine attention on thine own consort!

“You are righteous, humble and faithful to the commands of your sire; in you, justice and integrity flower in their fullness. All this is possible to those who have mastered their senses, O Long-armed Warrior, and you are fully self-subdued, O You of Charming Presence!

“The third evil, which through ignorance leads men to bear hostility to one another without cause, now shows itself in you I O Valiant Prince, you have vowed to the dwellers of the Dandaka Forest, whose defender you are, to slay the demons without mercy, and for this reason, equipped with bows and arrows, you have set out with your brother to the forest known as Dandaka. Seeing you advancing thus my mind is filled with apprehension and I am pondering how to act in the most profitable manner for your welfare in this world and the next. Your departure for the Dandaka Forest does not find favour with me, O Hero; I will tell you the reason.

“Entering the forest with your brother, armed with bows and arrows, it may well be that, on seeing the titans, you will loose your shafts! As the proximity of faggots increases the violence of the fire, even so does the possession of a bow increase the strength and energy of a warrior!

“In former times, O Long-armed Prince, in a sacred forest frequented by deer and birds, dwelt a devout and virtuous ascetic. With the intention of obstructing his austerities, Indra, the Lord of Saci, in the guise of a warrior, went to that hermitage, sword in hand. In this retreat, he left that excellent sword, requesting the sage, engaged in pious acts, to guard it as a trust. Receiving that weapon, he, fully conscious of the charge laid upon him, ranged the forest, carefully watching over the sword entrusted to him. Intent on preserving it, he ventured nowhere without that sword, either to gather fruit and roots or for other reasons. Constantly bearing this weapon and neglecting his penances, by degrees, that ascetic developed warlike inclinations. In time that foolish hermit, carrying the sword, began to enjoy nothing so much as violence and, losing his sobriety, was led astray and fell into hell.

“This, formerly, was the result of bearing arms! As contact with fire works change in a piece of wood, so the carrying of arms works alteration in the mind of him who carries them.

“From affection and reverence for you, I draw thine attention to this matter. I do not venture to instruct you. Equipped with bows as you are, I ask you to renounce all thought of slaying the titans in the Dandaka Forest without provocation. O Warrior! the world looks askance on those who strike without cause. It is the duty of warriors to protect those of subdued soul who are in peril. The bearing of arms and retirement to the forest, practice of war and the exercise of asceticism are opposed to each other; let us therefore honour the moral code that pertains to peace. Murderous thoughts, inspired by desire for gain, are. born of the handling of weapons. When you dost return to Ayodhya, you will be able to take up the duties of a warrior once more. The joy of my mother and father-in-law will be complete, if during the renunciation of your kingdom, you dost lead the life of an ascetic. Thus happiness accrues to one who discharges his duty; through performance of one’s duty, the whole world is conquered, duty constituting its very marrow. It is by the complete negation of self that the saints acquired bliss; happiness is not born of pleasure!

“O My Friend, with a pure heart fulfil your duty in solitude; you are conversant with the nature of the Three Worlds.

“It is through feminine weakness that I speak thus, for who would dare to instruct you in your duty? Having reflected carefully on what I have said, do what you considerest best without further delay!”