Shri Vasishtha, having heard the pronouncement of the ministers and brahmins, said: “The king has bequeathed the kingdom to Bharata, who, with his brother abides happily in the house of his maternal uncle, therefore, dispatch swift messengers speedily, to bring back the two princes. This and naught else should be done.”

Then all said: “Be it so, O Lord.”

Vasishtha then said to Siddartha, Vijaya, Jayanta, Asoka and Nandana: “Come hither and attend to what I command you to do: On swift steeds set out for the city of Rajagraha and, concealing all signs of grief, thus address Prince Bharata The holy priest Shri Vasishtha and his counsellors salute you and inform you that an urgent matter awaits your attention in the capital

“Have a care not to disclose to him the fall of the Raghu dynasty nor speak of Rama’s exile or the king’s death. Take with you silken robes and excellent gems for the King of Kaikeya and for Prince Bharata, and depart without delay.”

The messengers received the commands of Shri Vasishtha and taking provision for the journey went to their own houses. Then mounting swift horses, accustomed to prolonged travel, they started for the kingdom of Kaikeya. Having taken leave of the holy Guru, equipped with provisions, they departed in haste. Their course, along the bank of the Malini, lay south between the Uparathala mountain and north of Pralamba. They crossed the sacred Ganges at Hastinapura and proceeded westward arriving in Pancala (the Punjab) by way of Kuru Jangula. On the way, they beheld many lakes filled with limpid water and translucent streams and passing speedily onwards, reached the river Sharadanda, full of pure water and frequented by many species of waterfowl.

On the bank of that river grew the sacred tree Satyapayachan, to which the messengers made obeisance and then entered the city of Kalinga. Passing through the village of Abikala, they crossed the river Ikshumati issuing from the mountain Bodhibhavana, a territory formerly belonging to the House of Ikshvaku. There the messengers drank the water of the river from the palms of their hands and encountered certain brahmins versed in the Veda.

Traversing the land of Vahlika, they descried the mountain Sudamana which bore the marks of the Feet of Vishnu, and duly worshipped it. They beheld the rivers Vipasha and Shalmali and many pools, lakes and reservoirs. Proceeding further on their journey, according to the instructions of their master, they saw lions, tigers, elephants and various other beasts.

After a long period, the horses became fatigued, but the messengers pressed on to the town of Giribraja in the kingdom of Kaikeya. For the sake of performing the will of their lord and to preserve the royal dynasty and the honour of the House of Dasaratha, without relaxing their pace, the messengers entered the city at nightfall.