Three giant brothers – Devantaka, Trishiras, and Mahodara – were very sad.  Their friend Narantaka had been killed!

Mahodara, riding a giant elephant, stormed towards Angada, a strong monkey.  Devantaka, angry about his brother, ran at Angada with a big club. Trishiras, in his shiny chariot, also attacked!

Angada was surrounded! He ripped up a huge tree and threw it at Devantaka like a giant javelin! Trishiras chopped the tree into pieces with his arrows.  Angada then threw a rain of rocks and trees at the giants!

Trishiras smashed the rocks with his arrows, and Mahodara crushed them with his club.  Mahodara's elephant charged, and he hurt Angada with sharp spears. Devantaka hit Angada with his club, too. But Angada was strong! He knocked down Mahodara's elephant with one powerful punch!

Angada then fought Devantaka.  Devantaka hit Angada hard, but Angada got back up!  Then Trishiras shot three arrows at Angada.  

Hanuman and Nila, two other strong monkeys, rushed to help. Nila threw a big rock at Trishiras, but Trishiras broke it with his arrows!

Devantaka, seeing this, attacked Hanuman. Hanuman punched him so hard that Devantaka fell dead!

Trishiras, very angry, shot lots of arrows at Nila. Nila fell down, but he got up and threw a giant rock, killing Mahodara!

Trishiras then attacked Hanuman.  Hanuman threw a rock at Trishiras, but Trishiras broke it, too!  Hanuman threw many trees. Trishiras kept chopping them up. Hanuman jumped on Trishiras's chariot and tore it apart with his claws!  Trishiras threw a spear, but Hanuman caught it and broke it!

Trishiras then stabbed Hanuman with his sword! Hanuman hit Trishiras so hard that Trishiras fell down. Hanuman roared, and then cut off all three of Trishiras’ heads!

Another giant, Matta, was furious. He attacked the monkeys with his huge, golden club.

Rishabha, another brave monkey, fought Matta. Matta hit Rishabha hard, but Rishabha got back up. He hit Matta so hard that Matta fell down dead.

When Matta died, all the other giants ran away!  The battle was over, and the monkeys had won!
