On the day on which King Dasaratha distributed the cows in charity, the great hero Yudhajit, the son of the King Kaikeya and the maternal uncle of Bharata, also came to Janaka’s capital.

Seeing King Dasaratha, he made enquiries as to his welfare and said: “O King, the Lord of Kaikeya, through affection, sends tidings of his well-being to you, and seeks to know if it be well with your friends. O Great King, my father desired to see Prince Bharata, and for this purpose I went to Ayodhya. There, hearing that you had gone to Mithila with your sons, for their nuptials, I came hither in haste to see the son of my sister.”

King Dasaratha thereupon duly honoured his kinsman who spent the night happily in company with the princes.

The following day, rising early, King Dasaratha performing his customary devotions, proceeded to the sacrificial pavilion, escorted by the sages.

At an auspicious hour in the presence of Shri Vasishtha and other sages, Shri Ramacandra and his brothers adorned with every ornament being present, the preliminary ceremonies were performed.

Then Shri Vasishtha addressed King Janaka saying: “O King, King Dasaratha has inaugurated the preliminary ceremonies, he now awaits your pleasure. The sacred rite is completed when host and guests come together. Be pleased, therefore, to perform the principal nuptial rites.”

King Janaka listened to the words of the great-souled Vasishtha and answered: “What guard detains King Dasaratha at the gate? Whose sanction does his royal majesty seek? Is not this his house? Let the king enter! O Chief of Sages, my daughters, in readiness, stand at the altar, bright as the clear flame. I, standing near, await you all. There is no need for delay. Let the king cause the ceremony to take place without further hindrance.”

Then King Dasaratha with his sons and the holy sages entered the marriage pavilion. Thereafter, King Janaka addressed Shri Vasishtha, saying: “O Virtuous Sage, with the other sages perform the wedding ceremony.”

Then Shri Vasishtha ignited the sacrificial fire in the centre of the pavilion. Shri Vishvamitra and Shri Shatananda standing before him, sprinkled the altar with perfume, and decorated it with flowers. Then he set out the golden vessels and the sacred kusha grass, filling many pots with incense and arranging them in the form of a conchshell. Dishes filled with parched com and rice were placed there, and durbha grass spread about, the sacred formulas being pronounced over them. The holy rishis now lit a fire pronouncing the Vedic mantrams and offered oblations into it.

Shri Sita, adorned with jewels, took her seat by the sacred fire opposite Shri Ramacandra. King Janaka, addressing the Son of Raghu, said: “O Rama, from to-day my daughter Sita will be your companion in virtue. Accept her, O Prince, and take her hand in thine. This fortunate princess, faithful and tender, will constantly attend you, following you like a shadow, in loving obedience. May you both be happy.”

Saying this, King Janaka sprinkled on them water purified by mantrams. Then all the gods cried, “Jai! Jai!” and divine music sounded, while a shower of flowers fell from the skies.

Thus was Sita joined in marriage to Shri Ramacandra.

Then King Janaka said to Shri Lakshmana: “O Lakshmana, come hither, peace be with you! Take in your hand the hand of my daughter Urmila, tarry not, O Prince.”

Having thus spoken, Janaka likewise addressed Prince Bharata, saying: “O Son of Raghu, accept the hand of the Princess Mandavi” and to Prince Shatrughna, he said: “O Great Prince, accept the hand of Shruta-kirtti. O Princes of the House of Raghu, be gentle and faithful to your wives as they will be to you, receive them now, let there be no delay.”

Thus instructed by King Janaka, the four princes, taking the hands of the four princesses as directed by the Sage Vasishtha, circumambulated the fire, King Janaka and the sages performing the rites as ordained by the sacred ordinance.

As the nuptial ceremony of the four princes of the House of Raghu with the four princesses terminated, a rain of flowers fell on them from the sky. Divine music sounded, nymphs danced and the celestial singers broke into paeons of praise. All these marvellous events marked the wedding of the sons of King Dasaratha while the princes, circumambulating the fire, were united with their brides.

Thereafter with their wives, they returned to their apartments and King Janaka with his relatives and friends, with a joyful heart having taken part in the festivities, also withdrew.