Having addressed these bitter words to Ravana, Marica, full of apprehension, said:—“Let us go, but know that when I come before that warrior furnished with arrows, sword and bow, which he will wield to my destruction, my life is forfeit! Nay, he who opposes Rama will not return alive! For you he will prove the Rod of Death and you shalt fall beneath his blows. In what way can I further thine evil design? Yet I will go. May prosperity attend you, O Ranger of the Night!”

Highly gratified by these words, Ravana, embracing him warmly, addressed him in honeyed accents, saying:—

“This magnanimity is worthy of you; now that you are willing to accede to my request I know you truly to be Marica; heretofore another demon addressed me. Do you with me ascend my winged chariot, encrusted with gems, to which mules with goblins’ heads are harnessed. Having captivated Vaidehi in accord with my desire, fly thence, and she, being left alone, will be forcibly borne away by me.”

“Be it so”, answered Tataka’s son, whereupon Ravana mounted the chariot resembling a celestial car, and leaving that solitary place set out with all speed. Looking down on many villages, forests, mountains, rivers, kingdoms and cities, they finally reached the forest of Dandaka in which Rama’s hermitage stood. Descending from the golden car, the Lord of the Titans, accompanied by Marica, beheld Rama’s retreat and taking that demon by the hand, Ravana said to him:—

“Here is Rama’s hermitage shaded by palm trees; now accomplish the purpose for which we have come hither.”

Hearing Ravana’s words, Marica in an instant transformed himself into a deer and began to pace to and fro before Rama’s hermitage.

Assuming a marvellous form, wonderful to behold, the points of his horns studded with gems, his skin dappled, his mouth like a red lotus, his ears azure-tinted, his neck outstretched, his belly of a sapphire hue, his flanks the colour of the Madhuka flower, shining like the filaments of the Kanja flower, his hoofs like emerald, his legs slender and well-proportioned, his haunches gleaming with all the colours of the rainbow, that demon in an instant had become a ravishing gazelle of iridescent hue, studded with every kind of gem, of exceeding beauty. The whole forest and Rama’s enchanting retreat were filled with the radiance of that form, wonderful to behold, that had been assumed by the titan.

In order to capture the glances of Vaidehi with his shimmering colours, he strayed here and there in the grass among the flowers. His skin was stippled with hundreds of silver spots, giving him an enchanting appearance, as he wandered about nibbling the green shoots of the trees.

Approaching the circle of palm trees, he passed slowly here and there between the Karnikara trees in the hermitage, sometimes appearing in full view of Sita. That charming fawn of many colours strayed hither and thither in the vicinity of Rama’s ashrama, coming and going at will, sometimes disappearing into the distance, then drawing near again, gambolling playfully, thereafter crouching on the earth, or following a herd of deer; then again it would appear at their head, and by every means this titan, in the form of a gazelle describing a thousand frolicsome circles, sought to attract the attention of Sita. The other fawns, approaching, snuffed its scent and then scattered in all directions, but that demon, who formerly had taken delight in slaying them, now, in order not to betray his real nature, abstained from molesting those who approached him.

Meantime Vaidehi of brilliant glances was engaged in gathering flowers, diverting herself in the midst of the Karnikara, Ashoka and Cuta trees that she loved so well. As she wandered here and there plucking the blossoms, that princess of tender looks, who did not merit exile in the forest, saw before her the fawn studded with precious gems, its limbs encrusted with diamonds and pearls. Beholding that doe, with its beautiful teeth and lips, its skin the colour of silver, the slender-waisted Sita opened her eyes wide in wonder and delight, and the marvellous fawn, seeing Rama’s beloved consort, continued to pace to and fro before her, illumining the forest. Looking at that deer, never before seen by man, Sita, the daughter of Janaka, was amazed.