Shri Rama who had passed many days on that mountain, gratified Shri Sita by showing her many scenes of natural beauty, they themselves appearing as lovely as Indra and his consort.

Shri Rama said: “O Fortunate One, beholding the beauty of this pleasant mountain, no longer does the separation from my friends or my country cause me pain! O Centre of Delight! behold the loveliness of these peaks abounding in metals of various kinds, reaching the skies and frequented by birds of every species! These peaks, some of which shine like silver, some of which are ruddy, some yellow, some glittering with the splendour of the brilliant gems concealed in them; some sparkling with sapphire and crystal, and some resembling quicksilver and glittering like the stars! Though many lions and leopards abound in the forest, yet influenced by the pure nature of the ascetics dwelling here, they have ceased to follow their cruel instincts. Many varieties of birds have their nests on yonder hill, trees laden with fruit and flowers affording delightful shade, render the mountain enchanting!

“Here are mango, jambu, asana, lohdra, piyala, panasa, dhuva, ankotha, bhavya, tinisha, bilva, tindura, bamboo, kasanari, arista, varana, madhuca, tilaka, vadari, amlaka, nipa, vetra, dhanvaria, vijaka and other trees.

“O Auspicious Princess, behold the ravishing loveliness of these hills where the wise kinneras wander in pairs, their swords and coloured apparel hanging on the branches. See the charming retreats of the vidyadharas and their companions. These mountains with their cascades and bubbling springs appear like mighty elephants the ichor flowing from their foreheads.

“What mind would not be filled with delight by the breezes issuing from the caves of the mountain, redolent with fragrance, pleasing to the senses? O Peerless One, if it be for me to dwell here with you and Lakshmana for innumerable years, no grief or anxiety will visit me. O Lovely Lady, on the mountain of Cittrakuta, rendered pleasant by a profusion of flowers and fruits, whose delightful peaks echo with the sweet song of birds, I am content to dwell! By residing here, two objects have been achieved, the fulfilment of my father’s vow and the satisfaction of Prince Bharata. O Daughter of King Videha, behold this enchanting spot where self-control and asceticism are easily exercised. Say, art you happy here? The discipline of residence in the forest is declared by royal sages to be a means to liberation. Our ancestors such as Manu have held that residence in the forest is the means of acquiring the form of the gods. Behold, O Princess, yonder mountain, adorned by thousands of rocks blue, yellow, purple and white. At night, the healing herbs shine like fire, lighting the crags with their radiance. See, O Princess, some of the caves resemble houses, some appear like flower gardens, all enhancing the glory of the mountain. It would seem that Cittrakuta has sprung forth from the earth and from every side appears incomparably beautiful. Observe, O Auspicious One, how those devoted to pleasure, have spread couches here and there, and covered them with azure lotuses overlaid with coverings of bark. See the faded garlands cast aside by them and the rinds of many fruits of which they have partaken.

“This mountain Cittrakuta, in variety of flowers and transparent waters, has surpassed the capital of Indra in loveliness. O Sita, I will pass the twelve years here with Prince Lakshmana and you; pursuing the highest virtue and discipline, I shall thus protect my kingdom and earn merit.”