Rama and Sita flew in a magic swan-pulled chariot!  Whoosh!  It was so fast!

Rama showed Sita the battleground.  "Look, Sita!" he said.  "This is where I fought the ten-headed king, Ravana!  He was very bad, but I defeated him for you!"

He pointed to different spots.  "There's where I killed Kumbhakarna, the sleepy giant!  And there, Hanuman fought Prahasta and Dhumraksha.  Many, many other bad guys fell here, too!" Rama listed some names, but they were hard to remember.  Lots of giants and demons were defeated!

"See that ocean, Sita?  That's where we built a bridge to Lanka!"  Rama explained that his friend Nala helped build the amazing bridge. "And this is where we rested after our long journey."  He showed her the place where a special god gave him a wish and a holy place where even bad things get washed away. He also showed her the place where his monkey friend, Bibishana, came to help.  Then, they arrived at Kishkindha, Sugriva's city.  "This is where I fought Bali," Rama said.

Sita looked at Kishkindha.  "I want to go to your city, Ayodhya, with Sugriva's wives and the other monkey ladies," she said sweetly.

"Of course!" said Rama. He stopped the chariot. "Sugriva, tell all the monkeys and their wives to come to Ayodhya with us!"

Sugriva, the monkey king, told Tara, his wife, to gather all the monkey ladies.  Tara told them, "Sugriva says we're going to Ayodhya to meet Rama's family!"

The monkey ladies got ready and flew to Ayodhya in the magic chariot.

As they flew, Rama pointed out more places.  "See that big mountain, Sita? I met Sugriva there! And that's the Pampa Lake. I cried a lot there when I was sad because I couldn’t find you."  He showed her the place where he fought Kabandha, a giant with long arms!  He showed her where Jatayu, a brave bird, died trying to help her.  He showed her their old home, where Ravana took her away.  He showed her many more places.

Finally, Rama said, "Look, Sita!  That's Ayodhya, my city!  We're home!"

The monkeys and demons were excited! Ayodhya was so beautiful, it looked like a magical city in the sky!
