Shri Rama, having with Sita, distributed riches in abundance to the brahmins in charity, went with Lakshmana and Sita to see King Dasaratha, followed by their servants bearing weapons adorned with flowers and sandalwood.

The people of the capital mounting to the top of high buildings and the roofs of seven-storied houses to view them, were dispirited. Some said: “Behold now Shri Rama, formerly attended by four divisions of the army, is to-day only followed by Sita and Lakshmana.” Others answered, “Shri Rama, having tasted the delights of sovereignty and experienced in all the joys of life, he who confers wealth on the needy, prompted by duty, desires to render fruitful the promise of his sire. To-day, Sita never beheld before even by the birds, is exposed to the view of the common people on the highway.”

One said: “Surely, the king is possessed of an evil spirit or he would never send so dear a son into exile.” And another, “None ever banished even a traitor, how much less Shri Rama who has won the affection of the whole world by his excellent conduct? He is not only virtuous but is innocent, compassionate, learned, truthful, self-controlled and of subdued mind. His subjects are as distressed at the thought of his absence as the water-fowl during the summer drought. The sufferings of Rama, Lord of the world, afflict all, as does a tree uprooted from the earth. The glorious Ramacandra, knower of dharma, resembles the root of a tree of which the flowers, fruit, leaves and branches are the people. Let us, abandoning our gardens, fields and homes, sharing his woes, follow Shri Rama. Our houses deserted, their treasure removed, their courtyards neglected, without grain or stores, their beauty gone, will be buried in dust. The devas will no longer visit them, but mice scurrying hither and thither will fill them with countless holes. Without water, covered with soot, uncleansed, no daily rites will be performed there. Fallen in ruins, strewn with broken vessels, as if cursed by the king or by divine decree, all these, utterly forsaken by us, let Kaikeyi enjoy.

“We pray that this city abandoned by Shri Rama may be converted into a wilderness and the forest where Rama dwells become a flourishing city. May the snakes forsake their holes, the deer and birds abandon their abode in the mountains and valleys, and the lion and elephant leave the forest, in fear of us and come and dwell in the capital of Ayodhya. May the city abandoned by us, bereft of hay and grain having become the resort of serpents, deer and birds, be ruled by Kaikeyi and her son and may we, dwelling in the forest with Rama, enjoy fully every happiness.”

Shri Rama passing by, hearing their converse, was not in any way disturbed, but proceeding slowly, like a young elephant, with majestic stride approached the palace of his father which resembled the Meru mountain. Shri Rama entering the royal palace guarded by seasoned troops, beheld Sumantra standing there disconsolate. Shri Rama, with a smiling countenance, passing the people who were afflicted and filled with grief, approached his father’s apartment, desirous of serving him.

Before entering the royal chamber, he requested Sumantra, dejected on account of Rama’s departure, to inform the king of his arrival. Desirous of fulfilling the command of the virtuous monarch, Shri Rama, determined to enter the forest, requested Sumantra to make known his presence to the king.