Having crossed the boundary of Koshala, Rama, turning his face towards Ayodhya, with joined palms, addressed the city: “O Ayodhya, Chief of Cities, protected by the kings of the House of Ikshvaku, I take leave of you and of the gods your protectors who dwell with you. Having fulfilled the command of the king, I shall, returning from the forest, again behold you and my parents.”

Then lifting up his arms, Shri Rama, the tears falling from his eyes, addressed the citizens of his father’s kingdom: “O You Who have treated me with the respect and affection due to a master, it is not meet that you remain with me, now return to your homes and discharge the duties of your households.”

Bowing down to Shri Rama, the people circumambulated him with reverence and turned homewards, frequently halting, weeping and lamenting. Shri Rama, seeing them weeping and not yet satisfied with beholding him, told the charioteer to drive on speedily and passed beyond their sight as the sun sinks out of view at the time of evening.

Proceeding on his way, Shri Rama beheld prosperous towns and villages full of men of charitable, righteous and fearless disposition evidenced by the abundance of temples and sacrificial pillars of their cities. The gardens filled with mango trees were enriched by pools of translucent water with carefully tended highways and herds of cattle grazing here and there. Everywhere the recitation of the Veda could be heard. From his chariot, Shri Rama surveyed the Kingdom of Koshala and passed beyond its confines. The sagacious Rama, proceeding through the extensive land inhabited by happy and prosperous people, enriched by pleasant gardens, came to the southern boundary of Koshala and beheld the holy Ganga, adorned by the presence of the sages, with its cool waters flowing in three directions. Near the bank of the sacred river, he saw the beautiful hermitages, frequented by holy men and pools of limpid water visited by celestial nymphs at play. The holy Ganges, honoured by deities, titans, celestial musicians and naiads, that sacred current, displaying innumerable charming vistas, embellished by the gardens of the gods, and which in heaven is named the “Stream of Golden Lotuses”, that holy river, the sound of whose clashing waves resembles deep laughter, which moving rapidly, covered with foam white as snow, flows merrily forwards and falling from the heights on the rocks below, resembles a maiden’s plaited locks; sometimes made beautiful by whirlpools, here dark and deep, there with the roar of waters, proclaiming the presence of Shri Ganga herself; those sacred waters wherein the celestial beings plunge and swim, where white lotuses float, bordered by high banks or shelving sands; there, where swans, cranes, and cakur birds are heard, where trees adorn the banks and waterlilies float or fields of lotus flowers whose buds reveal their tender beauty carpet the tide. Sometimes the waters, reddened by the petals of lotuses, make the river appear like a lovely woman attired in a crimson sari; those sparkling waters, green as emerald, where mighty tuskers sport and also the great guardian elephants of the earth’s four quarters, or those bearing the gods, where the sound of Hara! Hara 1 resounds forever. Shri Ganga, beautiful as a woman, tastefully adorned with brilliant gems; Shri Ganga, enriched with fruit, flowers and birds of every hue, abounding in porpoises, crocodiles and serpents; that sacred stream, falling from the feet of the Blessed Vishnu, divine and spotless, the destroyer of others’ sin, having sported in the locks of Shri Shiva, thereafter descending on earth, through the power of the penance of Bhagiratha.

Shri Rama, proceeding towards the city of Shringavera, seeing the queen of the ocean, the holy Ganga, where the songs of the krauncha bird are heard, watching wave on wave rising on the sacred stream, that mighty warrior, Rama, said to Sumantra: “O Charioteer, let us lodge here. There, under the Ingudi tree, laden with verdant leaves and blossom, let us rest. O Benevolent One, let us linger by the mighty river, whose auspicious waters are worshipped by the gods, the danavas, serpents, beasts and birds, and let us offer homage there.”

Sumantra and Lakshmana answering “Be it so”, stayed the chariot under the Ingudi tree.

Arriving there, Shri Rama and Lakshmana descended from the chariot and Sumantra, unyoking the horses, respectfully seated himself facing Rama, at the foot of the tree.

The king of that country was one, Guha, dear to Rama as his own life, by caste a ferryman, but possessing an army and designated “King of Watermen”. Hearing that that Lion among men, Shri Rama, had come to his territory, he together with his aged minister and relatives went forth to meet the prince. Shri Rama, seeing the chief of ferrymen, from a distance, went with Lakshmana to meet and welcome him. Perceiving Shri Rama to be in ascetic’s garb, Guha, distressed, bowing before him, said: “O Prince, let this small kingdom be as Ayodhya to you, please issue your commands, I am at your service. O Mighty-armed One, it is rare to receive a guest so deeply beloved!”

Guha then brought excellent dishes of delicious foods, together with the arghya and said: “We are your servants and you are our lord, accept this kingdom and rule it as thine own. Here are dishes of various kinds, desserts, liquids, spices, excellent beds on which to rest and provender for the horses, all at your disposal.”

Shri Rama answered: “O Guha, you have come to welcome me on foot out of affection, by this I am duly honoured, I am pleased with you.” Then taking him in his strong arms and embracing him, Shri Rama addressed him in cheerful accents, saying: “O Guha, through my good fortune I behold you and your friends in good health. Is all well among your people and with your possessions? O Friend, having renounced the acceptance of gifts, I am not able to partake of what you have offered me with love; know that having assumed the robe of kusha grass and the antelope skin, I live on fruit and roots; I am the protector of dharma and my father’s servant. Being an ascetic, I may only accept a little grass for the horses and nothing beside—by this alone, I am fully welcomed. These horses of my father Dasaratha are dear to him, they having received oats, grass and pure water, I am honoured in fall measure.”

On this, Guha commanded his servants to provide drink and provender for the horses. Then Rama assuming a dress of bark performed his evening devotions, drinking the water brought by Shri Lakshmana. Then Lakshmana washed the feet of Rama and Sita who had laid themselves down beneath the Ingudi tree and seated himself respectfully near them. Guha with Sumantra seated near Shri Lakshmana who, armed with bow and arrow, carefully guarded Rama, spent the night in holy converse. Rama, the wise and illustrious son of King Dasaratha, deserving every comfort and who now, lying on the ground, suffered adversity, passed the night undisturbed in deep sleep.