Shri Vishnu having become the sons of King Dasaratha, the divine Brahma thus addressed the gods: “The blessed Lord Vishnu, the Ocean of Truth is engaged in a just undertaking for the good of all, you should therefore support Him by becoming incarnate as great beings in the monkey tribe, skilled in the arts of magic, swift as the wind, conversant with the dictates of virtue, wise and equal in might to the Lord, invincible, endowed with celestial bodies and skilful in the science of warfare. Some among you should assume the forms of nymphs, gandharvas and female ascetics who will give birth to heroes in the monkey tribe.

“In the past, when I yawned, the great bear, by the name of Jambavan, issued from my mouth.”

The gods thus instructed by the blessed Lord, caused warriors to be born in the monkey tribe from the wombs of countless celestial beings.

Indra created Bali, the Sun created Sugriva; Brihaspati created the wise Tara, Kuvera begat Gandhamadana, Vishakarma begat the mighty ape Nala, Agni begat Nila, who was as resplendent as fire and in valour surpassed his father.

The Asvini-Kumaras produced Minda and Dvivida; Varuna begat Suchena; Megha, was the father of Sharabha, the mighty; Pavana begat the warrior called Hanuman, whose body was as hard as a diamond and whose speed equalled an eagle’s; he excelled all the other warriors in wisdom and power.

There were thousands of warriors born in the monkey tribe ready to destroy Ravana. All the bears, monkeys and chimpanzees resembled the god that had produced them in characteristics, habits and prowess, and many were of outstanding valour. The female chimpanzees and bears gave birth to great beings of divine nature. They produced hundreds and thousands of healthy progeny. These dwellers of the forest were imposing in form and in strength and fearlessness resembled lions and tigers. All were able to cleave rocks and mountains and fight with their nails and teeth. Skilled in every kind of weapon, they could shake great peaks, uproot the stoutest trees and by their velocity even put the sea god to shame. Able to tear up the earth with their feet and cause the ocean to overflow, they could fly in the air and even seize the clouds.

These beings of the monkey tribe wandered in the woods, making captive the elephants, and by their shouts causing the birds in flight to fall to the ground. Thus were born millions of monkeys, able to assume any form, together with hundreds and thousands of monkey chiefs.

These chiefs begot other brave and powerful beings, some of whom dwelt on the mountains while others inhabited the valleys and forests.

The two brothers, Sugriva, the offspring of Surya, and Bali, the son of Indra, became the leaders of all the monkeys. Others lived under the command of group leaders, such as Nala, Nila and Hanuman. They were as strong as eagles and skilled in every sort of warfare.

Wandering about the forest, they slew lions, tigers and poisonous snakes. The powerful long-armed Bali protected the monkeys, bears and chimpanzees by his prowess. These heroes, invincible as mountains and of immense size, born to assist Shri Rama, filled the earth.