The blameless Anasuya having spoken, Shri Sita, approving her words, gently answered: “O Noble Lady, the advice you have given me, is in no wise a source of wonder to me, for it is my conviction that the husband is in authority over his wife. Even if the husband be poor and ignorant, yet women, such as I, should feel no aversion for him.

“But the husband who is worthy of praise on account of his excellent qualities and who is compassionate, self-controlled, constant in his affections, fully acquainted with his duty and who manifests the loving-kindness of a parent, excels all expectation.

“Whatever love Shri Ramacandra bears to his mother Kaushalya, he bestows equally on the other queens, and not this alone, but whoever the king has looked on with affection, that woman he also regards as his own mother.

“When departing for the fearful forest, my mother-in-law, Queen Kaushalya, imparted certain instruction to me, and I inscribed her words on the tablet of my heart. I call to mind also the advice given me by mine own mother at the time of my nuptials.

“O Righteous One, the crowning discipline for a woman is the service of her lord. To-day, you have awakened in my memory the counsels formerly given to me by my relatives.

“To-day, Savitri dwells in heaven through the service of her spouse, you also shalt enter the supreme abode through service of your lord. Rohini, a pearl among women and a dweller in the celestial region, ever accompanies the moon. Thus many others who have followed virtue, with fixed resolve, enter heaven through their merits.”

Anasuya rejoiced to hear Sita’s words and kissing her head in benediction, said: “O Sita, much merit has accrued to me by prayer and fasting. O Princess, pure in heart, I desire to confer a boon on you by virtue of these merits. Tell me what you dost desire? O Princess of Mithila, your words have given me extreme satisfaction. Now say what good I may accomplish in your name.”

Shri Sita, hearing the words of the pious Anasuya, versed in domestic duty, and being filled with astonishment, answered smilingly: “Your loving kindness has already fulfilled my every desire.”

Shri Anasuya hearing these words was gratified in greater measure and said: “O Sita, fortunate am I to behold you 1 Let my joy bear fruit, ask a boon. I can give you celestial garlands, apparel and precious unguents to adorn your person. O Daughter of Janaka, my gifts would enhance your beauty, they will never fade and they will become you well. Apply this powder which I now give to you; you shalt, by this, augment your husband’s beauty as Lakshmi increases the glory of the imperishable Vishnu.”

The princess accepted the robes, powder and ornaments, gifts of love, from the ascetic. The illustrious Sita, having received the symbols of affection from Anasuya, sat down near her with joined palms.

Then Anasuya requested Shri Sita to relate something of moment, saying: “O Sita, I have heard a brief account of your wedding, describe it to me now in detail.”

Shri Sita obediently answered: “Hear me, and I will relate it all to you. The King of Mithila, that brave and virtuous monarch, Janaka, the protector of his people as befits a warrior, once, when ploughing the earth to establish sacrificial ground, beheld me like a daughter emerging from the furrow. At that time, the king repeating the holy texts, was scattering the seed of herbs and, seeing my body besmeared with dust, was astonished. Being without issue, he took me in his arms and said, ‘This shall be my daughter’, and treated me with extreme love. Then a voice rang out from the heavens, saying: ‘O King, verily she is your daughter.’

“The king rejoiced in my possession and since my birth his prosperity has increased. That sovereign, constant in the performance of sacrifice, gave me into the care of his chief queen, she nourishing me with maternal affection. When I came to maturity, my father grew anxious, like an indigent man who is bereft of all he possesses.

“The father of a daughter, be he equal to Indra, must defer to his son-in-law, whether in status he be his peer or his inferior. My father was willing to submit to this eventuality and was consumed with anxiety, as one desirous of crossing a river, who finds himself without the means of transport.

“After much seeking, he was unable to find a suitable bridegroom and was beset with fears. On profound reflection, he resolved to convene a meeting of princes, that I might elect a husband.

“In ancient days, on the occasion of a sacrifice, one of our royal forbears received from Varuna, a great bow with two quivers that should never lack arrows. The bow was so heavy that many persons together could not move it and no monarch could draw it, even in dream.

“By his merit, my honoured sire had acquired the bow and he, summoning the kings in council, addressed them, saying:

‘You Sovereigns of Men, I will give my daughter in marriage to him who is able to lift up and string this bow.’

“The kings, beholding the bow resembling a mountain in weight, unable to lift it up, made obeisance to it and went their way.

“After a long time, the resplendent Ramacandra came to my father’s sacrifice in company with the Sage Vishvamitra. The king, my father, offered that truth-loving hero together with the Sage Vishvamitra, abundant hospitality.

“Then Shri Vishvamitra said to the king:

‘These are the two sons of King Dasaratha, who desire to see the bow. Be gracious enough to allow these two princes to view it.’

“King Janaka commanded the bow to be brought as requested by the Sage Vishvamitra.

“In an instant, Shri Ramacandra, lifting the bow, drew it. Having been bent by the thong, the bow broke in two, creating a sound like the crash of thunder. Thereafter, my honoured father caused water to be brought and offered to Shri Ramacandra and prepared to bestow me on him, but Shri Ramacandra did not consent to accept my hand till the intentions of his own father were known.

“King Janaka then requested the aged King Dasaratha to come thither and he, acquiescing in the matter, did so. With his approval I was pledged to the great-souled Ramacandra; my younger sister, a guileless girl, Urmila, being wedded to Shri Lakshmana.

“O Great Ascetic, thus was I bestowed in marriage and since then have taken extreme delight in ministering to my Lord, Shri Ramacandra, as is my duty.”