Perceiving Rama still to be indignant at the speech of Javali, the holy Vasishtha said:—

“O Rama, the Sage Javali is a believer in the transmigration of the soul; he has thus spoken through his desire to persuade you to return to the capital. O Sovereign of Men, hear from me concerning the creation of the world.

“In the beginning, all was water, and from that element the earth was formed and after this, Brahma and other gods came into existence. The eternal, imperishable Brahma was begotten of akasha (ether) and from him came forth Marichi, and from him Kashyapa was produced. From Kashyapa was born Vivasvat, and the son of Vivasvat was Manu himself, who was the first among the Prajapatis. Ikshvaku was the son of Manu and to him the whole world was given by Manu, and Ikshvaku became the first King of Ayodhya. The son of Ikshvaku was named Kukshi and his son was Vikukshi, whose son was the resplendent and illustrious King Vana and the great warrior Anavanya was his son. During the reign of the virtuous King Anavanya there was neither famine nor scarcity of rain nor any thief. The son of Anavanya was Prithu and his son was Trishanku. So great was Trishanku’s observance of truth that he attained heaven in his embodied state. His son was the mighty Dhundhumara. The son of Dhundhumara was Yuvanashva and his son was Mandhata. The illustrious Susandhi was the son of Mandhata and Dhruvasandhi and Prasenagita were the offspring of Susandhi. The renowned Bharata was the son of Dhruvasandhi and from Bharata sprang Ajita, against whom the great kings, Himaya, Talagangha and Shashavindu declared war. Ajita laid siege to them by building fortifications, but found their defeat beset with difficulties.

“Resigning his throne, he retired to the delightful Himalayas to devote himself to spiritual practices. It is said that one of his two queens was pregnant and the other gave her poison to destroy the foetus. The Queen Kalindi approached the Sage Cyavana, the son of Bhrigu, who resided in the Himalayas at that time, and paid him respectful homage.

He, gratified, knowing her to be desirous of a son, said:

‘O Goddess, you shalt bring forth a son who will be renowned, virtuous, magnanimous, of excellent conduct, a promoter of his race and a subduer of his foes.’

“The Queen hearing this, saluted the rishi with reverence; she then returned home and brought forth a son, whose eyes resembled the lotus and who resembled Brahma in splendour. Being born with the poison that her fellow-consort had administered to her, Kalindi’s son was named Sagara.

“Consecrated at a fitting season, King Sagara drained the ocean. His son was called Asamanjas, he oppressed the people and the king ordered him to be banished on account of his evil ways. The son of Asamanjas was Amshuman and his son was Dilipa. The son of Dilipa was Bhagiratha. The son of Bhagiratha was Kakustha whose son was Raghu from whom the royal line has since been named. The sons of. Shri Raghu were known by the names of Pravriddha, Purushadaka, Kalmashapada and Soudasa. The son of Kalmashapada was Shankhana who rising to great power, by a curse, was destroyed wth his whole army. The mighty hero Sudarshana was the son of Shankhana and his son was Agnivarna and Agnivarna’s son was Shighraga. His son was named Meru, and Meru’s son was Prashusvara, and his son was the great Sage Ambarisha. The son of Ambarisha was the truthful Prince Nahusha, whose son was the virtuous Nabhaga. Nabhaga had two sons, Aja and Suvrata, and the son of Aja was the illustrious sovereign Dasaratha. You are the son of the great monarch Dasaratha renowned all through the world, who reigned over earth and heaven.

“In the dynasty of Ikshvaku, the eldest son succeeds to the throne; while the eldest son lives, none else can become king. It is not meet for you to violate this sacred tradition of the House of Raghu. O Great One, reign over this earth filled with treasures and those extensive dominions subject to you, as did your sire!”