The citizens having departed, the king again consulted his ministers, saying to them: “To-morrow, the Pushya star is in the ascendant, I decree, therefore, that the lotus-eyed Rama shall then be installed as my successor.”

Dismissing his counsellors, the king, entering the inner apartment, commanded Sumantra to bring Rama to him once more. In obedience to the command of his royal master, Sumantra repaired to the palace of Rama, to bring him thither.

Rama, hearing the doorkeeper announce the second visit of the minister, became anxious and sending for him with all haste inquired of him the purport of his coming. Sumantra answered, saying: “The king desires to see you.” Shri Rama thereupon hastily repaired to the palace of his royal parent.

King Dasaratha retiring to the private apartment, issued instructions that Rama should be brought thither. The prince, entering his father’s palace, bowed low, with joined palms, from a distance, and contemplated his sire.

The king, raising him up, embraced him and, giving him a seat, again addressed him:—

“O Prince, I have now grown old and have ruled long, enjoying all the pleasures of the heart. I have also performed hundreds of sacrifices and distributed great quantities of food and lavish gifts as alms to the brahmins. O Great One, a son such as you are, is the fruit of much charity and study of the Veda. O Most Excellent One, what I desired to give in charity, I have given, and I have studied the Veda and offered up many sacrifices. My desire for pleasure is past; I have discharged every obligation to the gods, the sages, my ancestors and the learned brahmins, nothing remains to be accomplished by me but thine installation. O My Son, hear me, it is the will of my people that you become their sovereign; I shall, therefore, install you as my successor. Nevertheless, O Rama, fearful dreams have visited me at night, attended by the roar of thunder and the falling of meteors, signs betokening opposition. O Rama, the star of my birth is surrounded by the sun, Mars and Rahu; those versed in divination speak of it as of evil augury, that portends either the death of a king or the visitation of some grave calamity. O Prince of Raghu, I desire to see you crowned before my senses fail. Verily, the mind of man is inconstant. To-day, the astrologers announce that Purnavasu is in the ascendant, but to-morrow it will be the Pushya star, auspicious to your coronation. I desire you, therefore, to be proclaimed regent to-morrow. Do you, from now on, fast with your spouse, passing the night on a bed of kusha grass, with a stone for your pillow. It is the duty of the friends surrounding you to guard you. In such undertakings many obstructions arise.

“Prince Bharata is in the city of his grandsire, it is my will that you be installed in his absence. Your brother, Bharata, is virtuous, compassionate, master of his senses and obedient to you, yet, O Prince, I know the mind of man to be fickle, even the mind of a righteous and devout man may be subject to inconstancy. To-morrow, your coronation shall take place, therefore, now return to your abode.”

King Dasaratha having thus spoken, Shri Rama left for his palace. Entering his own abode, anxious to acquaint Janaki with the king’s proposal and not finding the princess in her own apartment, Rama repaired to the palace of his mother. There he beheld the Queen Kaushalya, seated in the temple, observing the vow of silence and praying for her son’s welfare. Acquainted with the sovereign’s decree, Shri Lakshmana and Sumitra were already in the palace of the chief queen, and Sita also having been summoned thither was sitting at her side.

Queen Kaushalya attended by Queen Sumitra, Lakshmana and Sita, having heard that Shri Rama would be installed when the Pushya star was in the ascendant, was meditating on Narayana, with closed eyes and controlled breathing.

Shri Rama, approaching his mother, paid reverence to her and joyfully exclaimed: “O Mother, my father has commanded me to serve the people and to-morrow I am to take up the burden of government. Shri Vasishtha, my preceptor, and other sages have ordained that the Princess Sita should, this night, fast with me. At dawn, the Princess Sita and I will carry out those prayers and rites proper to the occasion.”

Queen Kaushalya, long desirous of this event, with tears of joy flowing from her eyes, answered: “O My Beloved Son Rama, mayest you live long and may all thine enemies perish. Acquiring the throne, mayest you bring joy to your friends, relatives and also Queen Sumitra. O Child, surely you were born under an auspicious star since you have won favour with your royal sire by thine excellent attributes. The purpose of my devotion and austerity, undertaken to please the lotus-eyed Narayana, has been fulfilled to-day inasmuch as you are about to obtain the kingdom of the dynasty of Raghu.”

Shri Rama listening to his mother’s words, smilingly addressed Shri Lakshmana, he who ever paid honour to his father, and said: “O Lakshmana, share with me the government of the kingdom, you are my second self, the dominion is equally thine. O Brother, I desire life and a kingdom for your sake.”

Thereafter, Shri Rama, bowing to the two queens, with their permission withdrew with Sita to his own apartment.