In the presence of the vulture, whom the terrible Ravana had struck down, Rama, full of compassion for all, addressed the son of Saumitri in these words:—

“This bird, who sought to defend my interests, has been mortally wounded in the struggle with the titan and for my sake now lies dying here. Its vital breaths are barely perceptible, O Lakshmana, its eyes are dim and it is unable to speak.

“O Jatayu, if it be possible for you, then say what has become of Sita and how you have come to this sorry pass. For what reason has Ravana carried away my dear one? How did that radiant and enchanting face, resembling the moon, appear at that time, O Best of the Twice-born. What words did Sita utter at that moment? What is the strength, the appearance and the karma of that titan? Where does he dwell, O Friend, answer me!”

Beholding Rama lamenting like an orphan, the virtuous Jatayu answered in feeble accents:—

“Sita has been carried away by that Indra of Titans, Ravana, that evil wretch who resorts to the aid of sorcery and is able to loose the wind and the tempest. O Dear Child, I being exhausted, that Prowler of the Night severed my two wings and, thereafter taking hold of Sita, fled in a southerly direction. My breathing is laboured and my sight dim, O Raghava, I see before me the golden trees with leaves formed of Ushira. The hour in which Ravana bore Sita away was that in which the loser soon recovers that which is lost, ‘Vindya’ is its name, O Kakutstha, and Ravana was unaware of it. Like a fish that swallows the bait, he will soon perish! Do not, therefore, despair of recovering Janaki; you will soon sport with her, having slain Ravana in battle!”

While the vulture was thus replying to Rama, blood and morsels of flesh flowed from his beak and, on the verge of death, retaining his consciousness, Jatayu added:—“Ravana is the son of Vishravas and the brother of Vishravana!” and thereafter yielded up his life.

“Speak! Speak further!” cried Rama, addressing him with joined palms, but the life-breaths, withdrawn from that vulture’s body, were already dissipated. Thereupon the King of the Vultures fell on the earth, his legs, body and head stretched out and, beholding that bird resembling a mountain of vast proportions, that bird of reddened eyes, deprived of life, Rama, staggering under the weight of his misfortune, said to Saumitri in bitter tones:—

“Passing many years happily in the forest, the resort of titans, this bird has at length given up his life 1 Having lived innumerable years, he now lies here inanimate! None can withstand the course of destiny! Behold, O Lakshmana, this vulture who died in my service having sought to protect Sita, and who has been slain by Ravana of superior power. He renounced the dominion bequeathed to him by his ancestors and sacrificed his life for my sake. Undoubtedly the virtuous practise courage, devotion and the fulfilment of duty, even in the animal kingdom, O Saumitri! I did not feel so keen a grief for Sita’s abduction as for the death of this vulture, who has sacrificed himself for me, O Scourger of Your Foes!

“I hold this King of Birds in the same veneration as I did the illustrious and fortunate monarch, Dasaratha, O Saumitri! Do you bring fuel that I may ignite the pyre of that King of Vultures, who died for me. Placing the body of that protector of the realm of winged creatures on the funeral pile, who has been destroyed by the cruel titan, I shall cremate it. O King of the Vultures, O Magnanimous Being, cremated and blessed by me, depart, and ascend to those regions, further than which it is not possible to go and which are the abode of those who habitually offer sacrifice, those heroes who never retreat on the battle field and those who distribute land in charity.”

With these words, the virtuous Rama placed the King of Winged Creatures on the funeral pyre and, full of grief, ignited the flame as if performing the rite for his own kinsman.

Thereafter, the illustrious Rama, accompanied by Saumitri, entered the forest and, killing a few fat Rohi deer, strewed the flesh on the green grass as an oblation to that bird. Tearing off the flesh of those deer and kneading it into balls, he offered it to the vulture in that pleasant forest land, placing it on fresh grass. Thereafter, in order that Jatayu might soon reach the celestial abode, he recited those sacred formulas uttered by the brahmins, after which the two princes repaired to the Godaveri river to offer water in honour of the kingly bird. Following the traditional rites, those two Descendants of Raghu bathed and performed the Udaka1 ceremony for the King of the Vultures, who, having fallen on the field of battle, had executed a glorious and difficult deed and now, blessed by Rama, had attained to the place prepared for him in the realm of the saints.

Thereupon those two princes, after offering the last rites in honour of that excellent bird, as if to their sire, entered the forest, their minds set on the recovery of Sita, like Vishnu and Vasava, the Sovereigns of the Gods.