The Titan Akampana, speedily leaving Janasthana, repaired to Lanka in order to seek out Ravana, addressing him thus:—

“O King, the innumerable titans dwelling in Janasthana have perished and Khara himself has fallen on the field of battle; by some chance, I have been enabled to reach this place alive.”

Hearing these words, Ravana, his eyes growing red with anger, bent his gaze on Akampana as if he would consume him, and said:—

“Who, seeking his own destruction, has dared to exterminate my people? None in the world will be able to protect him, not even Indra, Kuvera, Yama or Vishnu himself, No man can save him who has defied me! lam the Lord of Time, the Consumer of Fire, the death of Death itself! In my wrath I am able to reduce Aditya and Pavaka to ashes! Verily I can subdue the very wind in its course!”

On this, Akampana, with joined palms, in a voice strangled with terror, solicited the protection of that Ten-necked One, who was mad with anger, whereupon that Lord of the Titans gave him the assurance of safety, inspiring him with confidence, and Akampana thereafter addressed him boldly, saying:—

“There is a son of King Dasaratha, who is youthful, resembling a lion, broad-shouldered like unto a bull, possessing long arms, handsome, renowned and of immeasurable prowess; his name is Rama; it is he, who in Janasthana has slain Khara and Dushana.”

At these words, Ravana, King of the Titans, breathing like a great serpent, enquired of Akampana, saying:—“O Akampana, when he came to Janasthana was Rama accompanied by the Leader of the Gods and all the Celestials?”

On hearing Ravana’s words, Akampana began to describe the great and noble exploits of Raghava, saying:—

“O King, Rama is a mighty warrior, an invincible archer and the equal of Indra himself in prowess; his eyes are slightly red and his voice resembles a kettledrum, his countenance is like unto the full moon. Followed by Lakshmana, as Anila follows Pavaka, this is the fortunate leader of monarchs who has destroyed your colony, as fire, fanned by the wind, consumes a forest! Rama was in no wise assisted by the Gods—of this there is no doubt—but his golden-winged arrows flying through the air, transforming themselves into five-headed snakes, destroyed the demons. O Mighty Sovereign, wherever they fled in their terror, they beheld Rama standing before them, and in this wise Janasthana was destroyed by him.”

Hearing Akampana’s words, Ravana cried out:—“I shall go to Janasthana and slay Rama and Lakshmana!”

Thereupon Akampana answered him, saying:—

“O King, hear from me the true measure of Rama’s strength and prowess. Supremely virtuous and brave, none in the world is able to subdue him in his wrath. By means of his shafts, he is able to stem a river in its course and shatter the very firmament with its stars and planets; nay, if the earth were to be submerged, he could raise it up and, should he so desire it, change the boundaries of the sea and flood the continents with its waters. He is able to subdue all creatures and control the course of the wind itself; indeed that foremost of persons, having destroyed the worlds, can create a new universe. O Ten-necked One, as a sinner is not able to enter heaven, neither canst you, nor your titans, defeat Rama in combat. The Gods and titans together cannot overcome him; yet there is a way of destroying him, which I will now unfold to you.

“Rama is wedded to one more beautiful than any woman on earth, and that slender-waisted damsel is known by the name of Sita. In the full bloom of youth, and possessed of well-proportioned limbs, she is a jewel adorned by jewels. In loveliness, she surpasses the celestial beings, nymphs and nagas. Having lured Rama into the forest, do you carry her away! Bereft of Sita, Rama will not survive!”

The Lord of the Rakshasas was highly gratified to hear these words and, after a little reflection, said to Akampana:—“Be it so! To-morrow, accompanied by my charioteer alone, I shall, with a glad heart, bring back the Princess of Videha to this spacious palace!”

The following day, Ravana started out in his chariot, yoked to mules, and it was bright as the sun, illumining the four quarters. Following the path of the stars in its rapid course, it resembled the moon itself surrounded by clouds.

Proceeding to a great distance, he approached the hermitage of Taraka’s son, Marica, who entertained him with marvellous dishes unknown to man. Presenting him with a seat and water wherewith to wash his feet, that demon addressed him, saying:—“O Lord of the Titans, is it well with you and your people? O Sovereign, being ignorant of thine intention, thine unexpected and sudden advent fills me with apprehension!”

Then the resplendent and eloquent Ravana answered Marica, saying:—

“O Friend! Rama, who is able to achieve that from which reason recoils, has destroyed the entire colony of Janasthana, heretofore impregnable, as also my generals, Khara and Dushana. Do you, therefore, aid me in bearing off his consort, Sita.”

Hearing these words of the King of the Titans, Marica answered:—“O King, the man who has thus counselled you concerning Sita is assuredly an enemy in the guise of a friend. By such advice, he has unquestionably affronted you and is envious of your great might.

“‘Bear Sita away!’ who has uttered such words? Who seeks to cut off the head of the entire titan host? Without doubt the man who has thus counselled you is thine enemy, since he desires you to extract the poison fangs of a serpent with your bare hands. Who is it who seeks to lead you astray and strikes thine head whilst you are sleeping happily?

“Raghava, that intoxicated elephant, may not be withstood on the field of battle. With the lineage of an illustrious House as his trunk, his valour the ichor, his outstretched arms the tusks, you are wholly unable to pit thyself against him. Do not rouse that sleeping lion who hunts the titans as deer, the arrows of whose quiver are his talons, his sharp sword the jaws.

“O King of the Titans, do not hurl thyself into that dreadful and bottomless ocean called Rama, whose bow is the crocodile, the strength of whose arm is the quagmire, whose shafts are the rising waves, and whose battlefield is its waters.

“O Lord of Lanka, compose thyself and return in peace to your capital. O Indra of Titans, continue to enjoy the company of your consorts, and let Rama delight in his own, in the forest.”

Hearing the words of Marica, the ten-headed Ravana returned to the city of Lanka and re-entered his palace.