Bharata, beholding the hermitage of the Sage Bharadvaja, leaving his army a league behind and laying aside his weapons and royal apparel, attired in a simple silken garment, proceeded on foot, preceded by his preceptor. Perceiving the sage himself, he left his counsellors and followed Shri Vasishtha only. The great ascetic Bharadvaja, beholding Prince Bharata approaching, rising from his seat, commanded his disciples to bring the arghya. The muni advancing to greet Shri Vasishtha, Prince Bharata offered salutations to him, the sage recognizing him as the son of King Dasaratha. The Sage Bharadvaja then calling for the ritual appointments presented them with the arghya, and refreshed them with fruits; he then enquired respecting their welfare and if all were well in Ayodhya. Then he asked concerning the state treasury and the ministers, but, knowing the king to be dead, he made no enquiry concerning him.

In return, Shri Vasishtha and Bharata enquired as to the health of the sage, the state of his body, the sacred fire, his disciples, the deer and the birds. The great ascetic Bharadvaja informed them respecting all these things and then, prompted by the affection he bore for Shri Rama, said to Bharata: “O Prince, what occasion has brought you hither, who art now the ruler of the kingdom? Tell me all. King Dasaratha, urged by his consort, banished Prince Rama to the forest, for the period of fourteen years. I trust that you, desirous of enjoying the kingdom without reserve, art not the harbourer of ill-will to your brother?”

Bitterly wounded by the rishi’s words, Prince Bharata, his eyes suffused with tears, his throat choked with emotion, said: “O Lord, you are all-knowing, if you dost thus regard me, then my life is vain. I am in no way implicated in the fate of Shri Rama. Such villainy would never proceed from me. O My Lord, why dost you charge me thus? That which my mother has done, on my account, is not approved by me, nor should I ever condone it. I go to gratify that great prince, by offering salutations to him and with the intention of bringing him back to the capital. O Divine One, this is my purpose, be pleased to tell me where Rama, now the lord of the earth, is to be found?”

Requested likewise by Shri Vasishtha and the other priests, Shri Bharadvaja, captivated by the words of Bharata, answered: “O Great One, you are born in the illustrious family of Raghu, and it is therefore not a source of wonder that dutiful regard for your preceptor, self-control and the following of the path of the wise, are all united in you! By my yogic powers, the contents of your heart were known to me, but I questioned you, that your resolution might be established, and your fame proclaimed throughout the whole world. It is known to me where Shri Rama and Lakshmana conversant with righteousness, abide. They dwell on the great mountain Cittrakuta; do you go thither to-morrow. To-day, stay here with your counsellors.

O Wise One, do you accede to my request.”

Then Bharata, the prince of great renown, accepted the offer of the sage and remained all that night at his hermitage.