Seeing his forces destroyed, the mighty-armed Dushana placed himself at the head of five thousand intrepid and invincible titans, to whom retreat was unknown.

Armed with pikes, sabres, rocks and trees, they let loose a hail of missiles on Rama from every side, without being able to wound him. Their onslaught was formidable and to all but Rama, deadly. The virtuous Raghava, however, met the attack with his arrows, his eyes closed, as unconcerned as a bull under heavy rain. Thereafter, growing wrath, he resolved to destroy the whole of Khara’s army and, burning with energy, covered that host and its leader, Dushana, with his shafts, whereupon Dushana, the Slayer of His Foes, met Raghava with weapons that resembled thunderbolts. Then the heroic Rama, enraged, severed Dushana’s mighty bow, slew the four steeds yoked to his chariot and cut off the head of his charioteer with a crescent-shaped arrow, thereafter piercing Dushana’s breast thrice with his shafts.

Then Dushana lifted up his mace covered with gold, that resembled a mountain peak and was capable of destroying the army of the Gods. Studded with nails, smeared with the flesh of his foes, keen as a diamond, able to cut through the gates of hostile cities, that weapon, resembling a mighty snake, was wielded by that titan of evil deeds, who hurled himself on Rama.

Nevertheless, as Dushana rushed upon him, Rama cut off both his arms with his arrows, and that mace, loosed from his grasp, fell forward on the field like unto the banner of Indra, whilst Dushana, bereft of it, his arms severed, sank to the earth like a mighty elephant that, stripped of its tusks, succumbs.

Seeing Dushana lying on the battlefield, all beings, witnessing that conflict, cried out “Well done! Well done!” and paid obeisance to Rama.

Meantime, impelled by fate, the three generals, Mahakapala, Sthulaksha and the mighty Titan Pramathin rushed on Rama; Mahakapala brandishing a great trident, Sthulaksha bearing a harpoon and Pramathin, a huge axe. Seeing them advancing, Raghava, taking out some sharp steel-pointed arrows, went forward to meet them, as one receives a guest, and the Delight of the House of Raghu severed the head of Mahakapala with a single arrow and assailed Pramathin with innumerable shafts, whereupon he fell to the earth like an axed tree; thereafter, Rama blinded Sthulaksha with his sharp arrows and, inflamed with wrath, with five thousand shafts slew an equal number of Dushana’s followers, sending them to the nether regions.

Hearing that Dushana and his warriors were lying dead, Khara, in great fury, addressed the leaders of the army, saying:—“Let all the titans attack that evil wretch, Rama, and strike him with weapons of every kind.”

Speaking thus, Khara, full of wrath, flung himself on Rama, followed by Durjaya, Karaviraksha, Parusha, Kalakarmuka, Hemamalin, Mahamalin, Sarpashya, Syengamin, Prithagriva, Vajnasatru, Vihangama and Rudhinashana, those twelve valiant generals with their forces, who fell upon Rama, discharging their excellent shafts.

And Rama, endowed with supreme energy, with his gold and diamond encrusted arrows, despatched the remainder of Khara’s forces, and those shafts, bereft of feathers, like golden stalks, resembling flames wreathed in smoke, laid those demons low, as lightning fells the giant trees. With a hundred earshaped arrows, Rama slew a hundred titans; and a thousand with as many shafts. Their breastplates and ornaments shattered, their bows broken, those Rangers of the Night fell on the earth, bathed in blood. Their hair dishevelled, covered with gore, they lay on the battlefield, like kusha grass scattered on the altar, and that great forest, strewn with the corpses of demons and befouled with their flesh and blood, resembled the region of hell.

Fourteen thousand demons of cruel deeds were slain by Rama, a mortal, single-handed and on foot! Out of the whole army only Khara of the great Car and the Titan, Trishiras survived, all others being slain by Lakshmana’s elder brother, the illustrious Rama.

Thereafter, seeing that vast army destroyed in the great conflict, Khara, ascending his splendid chariot, advanced on Raghava with his mace upraised.