The harsh words of Queen Kaikeyi caused intense suffering and agitation to the heart of the king. He began to reflect—“Am I seeing a dream by day, is my mind unhinged, am I possessed by an evil spirit, is an inauspicious star causing me distress or is this disturbance the result of some malady?”

Pondering awhile, the king grew calm, but his mind was still troubled, and, recollecting the demands of Queen Kaikeyi, he again became restless and agitated like a deer in the presence of a lioness. Heaving deep sighs, seated on the ground, he resembled a highly venomous snake hypnotized by the power of a mantram. He cried out in anger, “Woe unto me” and fell senseless.

After a long time, he recovered consciousness, and suffering great distress, full of wrath, answered Kaikeyi, while his glance seemed as if it would consume her. “O You of Evil Disposition, O Destroyer of my Dynasty, what harm have Shri Ramacandra or I done to you? Rama has ever treated you as his own mother. Why hast you determined thus? Alas! I brought you to my house for the destruction of my home. I deemed you to be the daughter of a king and you have shown thyself to be a venomous serpent. All my people unite in praise of Rama. For what fault shall I abandon him? It were possible for me to part with Queen Kaushalya, Sumitra, my kingdom, even life itself, but I cannot abandon Shri Rama. To behold the heir-apparent causes delight to my heart; when not contemplating him, my mind loses its capacity to act. The world may continue to exist without the sun, crops may grow without water, but I cannot live even for a little while without Shri Ramacandra.

“Therefore, O Sinful One, give up thine arrogance. See, I put my head at your feet, be gracious to me. Why hast you determined on this cruelty, O Wicked One? If you desires to test my love for Prince Bharata, then do so. When you didst say betimes that Rama, my eldest son, was entitled to the kingdom on account of his virtues, didst you utter these words in flattery to gratify me or to exact some service of Rama?

“The tidings of Rama’s installation is causing you a burning discontent. Possessed by an evil spirit, you are not thyself, I wean. O Devi, it is a great calamity that the House of Ikshvaku, famed for its probity, should fall into disrepute.

“Hadst you not been afflicted by an evil spirit or influenced by an inauspicious planet, you wouldst never have spoken to the detriment of others. It is certain that you are possessed by a malignant entity. O Child, you have often said that you didst love Shri Ramacandra, even as Bharata himself. O Devi, how dost you dare to seek the banishment of Ramacandra for fourteen years? How canst you demand the exile of the virtuous and tender Ramacandra for fourteen long years? O You of beautiful eyes, how canst you think of sending Rama into exile, who ever honours you? Rama has paid you greater respect than Bharata. I fail to comprehend how you canst desire his exile. Reflect well, none in the world will offer you greater service, respect and obedience than Rama.

“Among the thousands of women and maid-servants in my private apartments, none ever speaks ill of Rama, and he with a pure heart offers protection to every living being, while his subjects ever love and obey him. He has won the hearts of all beings by protecting the interests of the needy and the afflicted. Generosity, faithful service to his preceptor, valour in the field of battle, skill in archery, have all contributed to his renown. Truth, austerity, friendship, purity, simplicity of life, knowledge of philosophy and service of his teacher are well-known qualities of Shri Ramacandra.

“O Devi, Shri Ramacandra ever acting in the highest interests of all, equal to the maharishis and the gods in enlightenment, must not suffer the ills of exile. Shri Rama has never spoken a harsh word to any, how shall I then, at your instigation, give him this pitiless message? What shall befall me bereft of Rama who is endowed with forgiveness, gratitude, self-control, renunciation, truth and virtue, and who never inflicts pain on any human being?

“O Kaikeyi, I have grown old and my end is near. In this wretched state I beseech you to show mercy on me. The earth girdled by the sea, and all that is contained therein, shall be thine. Why dost you drive me to the brink of death’s dark abyss?

“O Kaikeyi, I touch your feet in supplication. Protect Shri Ramacandra and save me from dishonouring my word.”

King Dasaratha, stricken with grief, fell senseless, his whole frame convulsed and agitated. Again and again he entreated the queen to take him beyond the sea of suffering, but that cruel one growing each instant more adamant, replied: “O King, if you repent of the two boons given to me, none in the world will call you righteous. When other kings question you regarding your promises, O Righteous One, what will be thine answer? Will you say that she to whom you owest your life and by whose grace you yet livest, who rendered you great service at the time of misfortune and to whom you didst promise two boons, has now been refused these blessings?

“Assuredly you shalt become a stigma on the illustrious dynasty of Ikshvaku, having given promises from which you now wouldst fain withdraw. Recollect King Shivya, who gave the flesh of his own body, to redeem a pledge, was of your royal house. King Alarka, likewise of your dynasty, plucked out his eyes that the sight of an aged and learned brahmin might be restored, and thus obtained the highest state. Not only man is bound by his word, the ocean whose boundaries are fixed, does not pass beyond the shore. Therefore, recollecting your pledge, do not relinquish it. O King, art you bereft of your senses? Abandoning truth, you wouldst grant Rama the kingdom so that you mayest enjoy the embraces of Queen Kaushalya. Be it in accord with dharma or not, be it truth or falsehood, you must fulfil the promise made to me, it shall never be revoked.

“Should you withdraw your pledge and grant Ramacandra the kingdom, I will give up my life by drinking deadly poison. Were I to see Queen Kaushalya receiving salutations as chief queen, I should not be able to endure it.

“O Great Sovereign, I swear by Bharata and my own life that nothing save the exile of Rama shall satisfy me.”

After speaking these words, Kaikeyi became silent, disregarding the supplications of the afflicted monarch. Understanding the full portent of the harsh words of Kaikeyi, implying Rama’s exile and the rulership of Bharata, the king remained silent for a long time. His senses numbed, he gazed steadfastly at the face of his beloved queen, speaking thus bitterly.

Maharajah Dasaratha, afflicted on hearing the threatening speech of Kaikeyi resembling a thunderbolt, inspiring pain and grief, knowing she had resolved to banish Rama, cried out: “O Rama I Rama!” and heaving deep sighs fell to the earth like a felled tree. Like a madman bereft of sense or as one in delirium or a snake hypnotized by incantations, he fell, deprived of his glory. In abject tones, he addressed Kaikeyi, saying: “Who has instructed you in this evil design, cloaked in specious garb? Art you not ashamed to address me as one possessed? Formerly, I did not deem you capable of such conduct; in youth, your disposition was otherwise. What has overpowered you that you seeks such a boon? Stay these unjust words that Rama should go to the forest and Bharata occupy the throne. O Sinful One, O Cruel-hearted One, O Evil Doer, relinquish the insistence on your resolve, for thine own sake and for the sake of your subjects and your son. Either Rama or I must have offended you. How have we done so, that you speakest thus? Assuredly Prince Bharata will never wish to occupy the throne while Rama lives. I deem Bharata no less virtuous than Ramacandra. When instructing Rama to go to the forest, seeing him stricken, how can I look on him? How can I look upon his face darkened like the moon in eclipse? How can I revoke that decision made in consultation with my ministers and friends desiring my welfare, causing confusion, as the sudden smiting of an army by the enemy. What will the kings of other lands say when they hear the breaking of my resolve which was reached by common consent? Will they not say: ‘King Dasaratha of the House of Ikshvaku is like a child. We marvel that he has ruled so long.’ When the aged, wise and learned brahmins enquire for Rama, shall I answer them that, coerced by Kaikeyi, I have sent him into exile? If I say this in truth, it will be accounted falsehood since I have already instructed my Guru to install Shri Rama as regent. What will his mother, Queen Kaushalya, say, if I banish Rama? How shall I explain this cruel deed to Queen Kaushalya? She is ever dutiful, a friend, serving me as a handmaid, keeping my secrets as a trusted companion, practising virtue like a woman and in attending on my welfare resembling a sister, serving me with delicious food like a mother, ever speaking sweetly to me, ever desiring my good; her son is dearest to me. How can I fail to accord her due respect? Fearing your displeasure, how great would be my subsequent repentance and remorse?

“As one partaking of delicious food, really injurious to him, is later filled with regret, so knowing Rama exiled at my command, the terrified Sumitra will place no further faith in me. Oh! how unfortunate is this, that Sita hearing these evil tidings of my death and Shri Ramacandra’s banishment, will yield up her life, as a nymph dies deprived of her mate in a Himalayan valley.

“I shall not long survive the exile of Rama and the grief of Sita. Enjoy you the kingdom with your son, but as a widow! Know well, O Devi, there is no happiness for me in life if Rama is exiled. As men infatuated by the colour of wine, drink it thinking ill of it the while and knowing its harmful consequences, so did I, charmed by you, enter into union with you, believing you true and faithful. Yet now I know your disposition to be incomparably vile. You have deluded me with alluring deceits.

“As a hunter decoys a deer by sweet music, so alas! will the people of the capital think of me, as my son’s executioner. They will shrink from me as from a brahmin who drinks intoxicating liquor. Alas! that I should hear such bitter words. Now I am suffering deep affliction as men who consume the fruit of their former iniquities. O Sinful One, having long protected you, it is I who have erred, like the man who carefully preserves the rope with which he is eventually hanged.

“As a child, in a solitary place, plays with a black snake not knowing it will be the cause of his death, so am I. Who is more wicked than myself, who, during my lifetime causes my saintly son to become an orphan? The whole world will despise me saying: ‘King Dasaratha is overcome by lust and at the prompting of a woman has sent his son into exile.’

“Shri Rama in his childhood abstained from flesh, honey and wine, and faithful to his brahmacarya vow, was reduced to a skeleton by the observance of severe austerities, much study and the firm service of his preceptor. Now, a householder, the time has come that he should enjoy health and prosperity, yet now he is condemned to undergo great physical privation. It is certain when I command him to go to the forest, he will reply ‘Be it so, O Sire’. Alas! how much better if it could be otherwise. My beloved child will assuredly not disobey me. Not knowing my true reason, and believing the command to spring from the sincerity of my heart, he will acquiesce and willingly depart; yet all will execrate me if Rama leaves us.

“Death, who spares none, will take me to the region of Yama while Shri Ramacandra has gone to the forest, then O Kaikeyi, what grievous injustice will you inflict on your remaining relatives and Queen Kaushalya? She, deprived of Rama and Lakshmana, will no longer be able to endure her grief and will yield up her life.

“O Kaikeyi, having cast me, Kaushalya, Sumitra and my three sons into the pit of death, canst you be happy? Will you be able to protect the dynasty of Ikshvaku, which for long ages has been ruled without disturbance, when Rama and I are gone? Will Bharata approve the banishment of Rama, if it be so, let him not perform my obsequies. O Enemy, may thine ambitions be fulfilled. When I am dead and Rama banished, then will you, a widow, govern the kingdom with your son.

“O You dwelling in our midst as the pretended daughter of a king, were you truly a princess, thine incomparable renown would not have been tarnished, nor would I have been set at nought by you.

“Now my son, accustomed to ride on chariots, horses and elephants will have to walk barefoot in the forest. He, who formerly was served at table by attendants in jewelled livery, each vying with the other, saying: ‘My dish is sweeter, O Lord,’ how shall that Rama henceforth live on the bitter and insipid fruits of the forest? How shall he pass his life dependent on fruit and roots? How shall Shri Ramacandra, accustomed to costly apparel and a luxurious couch, sleep on the bare ground, clothed in the yellow robe of a mendicant? I know not why an evil-minded woman should issue this cruel decree that Rama should be exiled and Bharata be installed as regent.

“Woe unto those women seeking material gain, skilful in accomplishing their own purpose! I do not condemn all women, but those like the mother of Bharata. O Kaikeyi, versed in wrong doing, ever meanly disposed and seeking thine own advantage, didst you enter my house to cause me affliction? What fault hast you seen in me or in Ramacandra, the friend of all the world? O Kaikeyi, on seeing Rama suffering in the 182 forest at your request, fathers will abandon their sons, faithful wives their husbands, and the whole world will condemn you.

“When I behold Shri Ramacandra adorned and handsome as a god, approaching me, my eyes are delighted; seeing him thus, I am filled with joy and courage. The affairs of the world may continue in the absence of the dawn, and the earth exist without rain, evoked by Indra, but none in the capital will enjoy happiness beholding Rama going into exile.

“Alas! To-day, I am about to perish for long nursing you in my arms, O Kaikeyi, a venomous snake bent on my destruction. You are my real enemy. Now do you, Rama and Lakshmana perform my funeral ceremonies, then govern the kingdom with your son, Bharata. Destroy my relatives and friends, depopulate my towns and country, and live in accord with mine enemies, O You Cruel Wretch! Why do your teeth not break into a thousand fragments, seeing you have spoken improperly before your lord, and uttered vain boasts. Never did my Rama speak an unkind word to you. He knows not how to speak unkindly. You chargest Rama with baseness, who ever was of gentle speech and who is endowed with every excellent quality.

“O You Defamer of the Kingdom of Kaikeya, I shall not grant your request whether you be angered or sorrowful or takest your life by swallowing poison or dasheth your head against a rock, or even sinkest into the earth. You utter words keen as the edge of a razor, deceitful and heartrending, veiling them in gentle accents, your nature is perverse, you are the destroyer of thine own family. You have inflicted bitter agony on me. Though charming in looks, you are a dangerous woman. I do not desire to consort with one so surpassingly wicked.

“What use to speak of love and joy, I cannot live without Ramacandra. O Devi, abstain from destroying me. I touch your feet, be gracious to me.”

Finding her heart unmoved by his appeal, King Dasaratha like an orphan, fawning and abject, fell unconscious at the feet of Kaikeyi as one about to die.