Kaikeyi beholding the king distracted with suffering, undecided how to act, and restless as a fish on dry land, said:—

“O King, what is the meaning of your grief and sorrow? Having promised me two boons, will you incur the sin of default? Those versed in the secret of righteousness, call truth the essence of virtue. I ask you but to protect truth for thine own good. O King, in ancient times, your forbear, King Shivya fulfilled a promise given, by yielding up his body to a hawk and thus acquired a high spiritual state. Thus also the illustrious Alarka gladly taking out his own eyes gave them to a blind brahmin versed in the Veda. The Lord of Waters, the ocean, paying due regard to truth, does not pass beyond its boundaries at the time of the full moon. Truth is Brahman. Truth is the crown of righteousness. The imperishable Veda proclaims the glory of truth. When the heart is purified by the practice of truth, Brahman is realised. O King, if you boldest truth to be the fruit of virtue, then following truth grant me the two boons, O Bestower of Boons. For the sake of safeguarding your future happiness, send Rama into exile! Send Rama into exile at my request. Thrice I repeat my desire. If you failest to exile Rama, I shall not survive the dishonour and shall yield up my life in your presence.”

Hearing the words of Kaikeyi, King Dasaratha found himself bound and unable to escape, like King Bali of old in the presence of Vamana. Distraught, his mind agitated, his countenance pallid, the king resembled a bullock tottering between the yoke and the wheel. Anxiety and grief overwhelmed the king; with a supreme effort, mustering his courage and controlling his senses, his eyes distended, he addressed Kaikeyi; “O Sinful Woman, at the time of our nuptials, in the presence of the sacred flame, I took your hand in mine, but to-day, I reject you and the son born of you, Prince Bharata. O Devi, the night is nearly passed and the sun about to rise. My Guru and the elders will urge me to perform the installation ceremony. Let the preparations made for the installation be used for my funeral rites. Let no part therein be taken by you, O Kaikeyi, as you dost oppose the installation of Shri Rama. How shall I look upon the faces of these people now filled with joy in anticipation of Rama’s enthronement, that will soon become overcast and melancholy?”

The night illumined by the moon and stars passed away as the King was speaking, and day dawned. Then Kaikeyi, eloquent in speech but full of iniquity, transported with anger, spoke passionately:—

“O King, why dost you speak like one affected by a grave disease? Send for your son Ramacandra to come hither. Install my son on the throne and send Rama into exile. Then shalt you have accomplished your duty.”

The king, like a well-bred horse smarting under the lash, replied: “I am caught in the net of dharma, I am bereft of understanding, let me behold my eldest son, Shri Rama.”

The morning had now dawned, and the night had fled; the sun had risen and an auspicious planet was in the ascendant. The blessed Lord Vasishtha endowed with every excellent quality, surrounded by his disciples, holding the sacred articles required for the installation, came to the great door. Passing through the capital, Shri Vasishtha observed the streets swept and watered. Flags were fluttering everywhere in the breeze, flowers of many kinds were strewn on the roads and garlands hung here and there. All the inhabitants looked happy; shops and stalls displayed a variety of merchandise, while incense mixed with ambergris and sandalwood perfumed the air. Everywhere people were celebrating the festival and eagerly awaiting the coronation of Ramacandra.

Having passed through the city of Ayodhya, which resembled Amaravati, Shri Vasishtha came to the royal palace, and beheld at the gate an assembly of brahmins and teachers who enhanced the scene. Innumerable priests, skilled in the ritual of sacrifice, courtiers and leaders of the warrior class, as well as merchants were gathered there. Shri Vasishtha penetrated to the private apartments and delightedly entered there. At the door he beheld the charioteer Sumantra of pleasing looks and the holy sage begged him to announce his arrival to the king and inform his majesty that he had brought the sacred water of the Ganga in golden vessels, and various seeds, fragrant herbs and gems of different kinds. There was also honey, curds, clarified butter, parched rice, kusha grass, flowers and milk, together with eight beautiful virgins and a white elephant. A chariot drawn by four horses, an excellent sword and bow, a palanquin with bearers and a canopy resembling the moon in purity. Two white camaras, a narrow-necked jar of gold, white heifers, a lion with great teeth, a fine steed, a lion throne, a tiger skin, sacrificial fuel and fire. Musicians of every kind, beautifully adorned women singers, teachers, priests, cows, deer and birds; representatives of the people and merchants with their families were gathered there. These and many people inspired by affection and of gentle speech, had come with their leaders to see the coronation of Rama.

Shri Vasishtha ordered Sumantra to inform the king with all haste that Rama should be installed when the Pushya star was in the ascendant. Sumantra instructed by the royal Sage Vasishtha, and having access to the person of the king, entered the palace crying “Jai! Jai! to his majesty”. The guards permitted him to enter without hindrance, and Sumantra, approaching the king, ignorant of his condition, began to praise his royal master, according to the prevailing custom. With great humility he addressed him, saying: “O Gracious Sovereign, as the sun at the breaking of day gives pleasure to the sea, so do you give us joy by your radiant countenance. Add to our delight, O Mighty Lord! As in the morning Indra was adored by his charioteer, whereafter he defeated the asuras, so do I salute you. I come to wake you as the Vidyas and Vedas waken Brahma. As sun and moon stimulate the earth which supports all men and life, so do I come to waken you, O Great Ruler. Awake, O Maharaj and rejoice the hearts of the people by your sight. Don your royal robes and adorn thyself with the great gems, resplendent like the sun on the crest of Mount Meru. O Sire, may the Moon, the Sun, Shiva and Kuvera be auspicious to you. May Varuna, Agni and Indra grant you success. The lovely night has passed and the auspicious day has dawned. O Royal Sage, arise and perform your duties; preparations for the installation of Rama are completed, the leading citizens and the inhabitants of the capital are waiting in reverence at the gate; the blessed Sage Vasishtha, with his disciples, is at the door. Command us, O King, to inaugurate the coronation of Rama immediately; as cattle without a keeper, an army without a general, night without the moon, cows without a bull, so is your kingdom without a king to-day.”

The king hearing the peaceful words of Sumantra was once more submerged in the sea of sorrow; though overcome with grief, his eyes red with wrath, he answered him: “O Sumantra, your words of praise inflict great pain on me.” Sumantra, beholding the miserable condition of his master, and hearing his anguished words, joining his palms in submission, stepped backwards, tongue-tied.

Then Kaikeyi, skilled in achieving her own purpose, addressed Sumantra: “O Sumantra, being overjoyed on account of the installation of his son, the king has not slept this night. Being fatigued, he is now overcome with sleep. Go you, therefore, and bring the illustrious Ramacandra hither; this matter requires no deliberation.”

Sumantra reflected that the arrival of Shri Ramacandra would pacify the mind of the king: he speedily went to summon him and on the way reflected, “Why has Queen Kaikeyi summoned Rama in haste?” The charioteer believed the eagerness of the king had prompted him to summon Shri Ramacandra for the purpose of his installation. Sumantra, happily came to the beautiful palace of Shri Rama which resembled a small island in the sea, and beheld there many people standing at the gate.

He beheld many kings and great chieftains assembled in their allotted places.