Borne away by Ravana, Vaidehi, seeing none who would defend her, suddenly observed five powerful monkeys standing on the summit of a mountain.

Thereupon that large-eyed princess of surpassing charms, let fall among them her silken mantle, bright as gold and her rich jewels. Reflecting ‘May they convey the tidings to Rama’, the beautiful Sita dropped her cloak and ornaments in their midst.

In his anxiety the red-eyed Dashagriva did not observe this proceeding but these excellent monkeys beheld the large-eyed Sita, who did not move her eyelids as she was crying out. Then that Lord of the Titans, passing beyond the Pampa lake, his face turned towards Lanka, continued on his way, clasping the wailing Maithili. Although experiencing a transport of joy, Ravana in truth was carrying his own destruction in his arms, like a sharp-toothed and poisonous serpent.

Coursing through the air, he left behind forest, rivers, mountains and lakes and speeding on like an arrow shot from, a bow he passed over that sanctuary of whales and crocodiles, the indestructible abode of Varuna, the refuge of rivers, the ocean. Beholding Sita borne away, the waters became convulsed and the great serpents and fish were startled.

Then the voices of the Caranas and Siddhas could be heard in the sky, saying: “The end of Dashagriva is at hand! Ravana however, who symbolised death itself, bearing the struggling Sita in his lap, entered the city of Lanka.

Reaching that capital with its broad and spacious highways, he entered the palace and penetrated into the inner appartments. It was there that the dark-browed Sita, a prey to grief and despair, was set down by Ravana in his own domain, as Maya sheds his illusion.

Then Ravana addressed those demons of dreadful aspect, saying:—

“Let none look on Sita without mine authority! It is my will that she have pearls, rubies, robes and ornaments to the extent of her desire! Whoever speaks harshly to her, either knowingly or unknowingly, will forfeit his life!”

Having spoken thus to the titan women, Ravana left the inner apartment and began to reflect on what more should now be done.

Observing eight valiant, flesh-eating titans, that exceedingly powerful One, blinded by the boon he had received, after extolling their strength and heroism, said to them:—

“Equipped with every kind of weapon, betake yourselves with all speed to Janasthana, where Khara formerly dwelt and, summoning up your courage, banishing all fear, establish yourselves in that place, which is now a desert on account of the massacre of the titans. A great and mighty army was entrenched in Janasthana, which, with Khara and Dushana, was destroyed in combat with Rama. Since that time, an inordinate rage which I am unable to control has taken possession of me, precluding all rest. I wish to avenge myself on my sworn enemy, nor shall I sleep till I have slain him in fight. In the hour that I bring about the death of the slayer of Khara and Dushana, I shall rejoice, as a beggar on the acquisition of wealth.

“Established in Janasthana, keep me scrupulously informed concerning Rama and his movements. Without respite, let the Rangers of the Night take action and constantly strive to bring about Rama’s end. Being acquainted with your valour, which I have often witnessed in the field, I have chosen you to repair to Janasthana.”

Hearing these flattering and significant words of Ravana’s, those titans, bowing down to him, left Lanka in a body and took the direction of Janasthana in all haste, having first made themselves invisible.

But Ravana, having secured Mithila’s daughter and brought her to the palace, though he had thus incurred the hostility of Rama, gave himself up to transports of senseless joy.