Seeing the righteous Ramacandra determined to obey his sire, Queen Kaushalya, her eyes filled with tears and her throat choked with emotion, said:—

“O Rama, you have never experienced hardship. Fruit of my womb and the seed of King Dasaratha, you, following dharma, hast ever spoken sweetly to all, how will you be able to endure living in the forest? He whose servants live on sweetmeats and butter, how will that Rama of mine be able to live on roots and fruit? Who will not feel insecurity, knowing King Dasaratha to have banished his illustrious and virtuous son? If he acts thus to such a son, what of myself? If Ramacandra, beloved of all, is compelled to enter the forest, then undoubtedly destiny (past karma) rules our joys and sorrows. O Child, the fire of grief in my heart, fanned by the wind of thine absence, fed on lamentation and affliction; stimulated by tears, emitting the smoke of anxiety, will utterly consume and destroy me, like a forest fire at the end of winter reduces the bushes, creepers and grass to ashes. O Child, as a cow runs after its calf, so shall I follow you wheresoever you goest.”

Rama, listening to the sorrowful speech of Queen Kaushalya, replied: “O Mother, the king is sorely distressed by the deceit of Kaikeyi, and I also must leave him when I go to the forest. The Maharajah will not survive if you also come with me. No more cruel act can a woman perform than to leave her husband; it is not to be countenanced. As long as my father lives, it is for you to serve him. This eternal dharma must be followed by you.”

The virtuous maharani listening to the advice of Shri Ramacandra, he who overcame difficulties with ease, replied submissively to him: “O My Son, your words are true.”

Shri Rama then addressed her who was suffering deep distress, saying: “O Goddess, both you and I must obey my father. He is first my preceptor, secondly my father, thirdly your husband and finally the protector, master and lord of us all. Having cheerfully passed fourteen years in the forest, I will return and do your bidding.”

Queen Kaushalya, her eyes brimming with tears, she who did not merit suffering, answered Shri Ramacandra, saying: “O My Son, how shall I endure dwelling with my rivals? If you are resolved to enter the forest at the command of your father, then like a wild doe take me with you.”

To his weeping mother, Shri Rama replied: “As long as a woman lives, she should consider her husband as her master and her lord. The king is our master, how should we be masterless while the king lives? Bharata also is virtuous, humble and devoted to the good of all. He will undoubtedly treat you with respect and not oppose you. When I am gone, let not the king suffer on account of my separation, and let him not be overcome by this great grief. The king is now aged, it becomes you to serve him with every care. Even a virtuous woman, devoted to piety and fasting, if negligent towards her consort, comes to a sinner’s state, but she who is devoted to her lord attains heaven. The woman who is ever devoted to her husband and ever ready to seek his welfare, attains heaven, even if she has not worshipped any god. Service of the husband is a duty sanctioned by ancient tradition, by the Veda and by the scriptural law. O Mother, undertake those rituals promoting universal peace and serve the gods with floral offerings. For my sake, give hospitality to pious and learned brahmins and await my return. Performing the discipline of daily purification, give up savoury foods, and existing on simple fare, serve the king. Should the king still be living when I return, truly it shall be well.”

The queen, her eyes suffused with tears, distressed on account of the impending separation from her son, replied to Shri Ramacandra: “O Child, your resolution to enter the forest being fixed, I have no power to restrain you. O Hero, fate is irrevocable, therefore, enter the forest without anxiety, mayest you be happy. On your return, my sufferings will cease. O Auspicious One, when you returnest on the fulfilment of your vow, rendering back the debt you owest to your father, my joy will be complete. None can comprehend the warp of fate.1 It is fate that urges you to oppose me. O Prince, now depart and return safely, promoting my delight with a pure heart. O Child, I pray that you will return soon, and that I shall behold you in robes of bark with matted locks.”

Queen Kaushalya, knowing that Ramacandra was eager to enter the forest, reverently gave him her blessings, uttering auspicious words.