The two princes, following the instructions of Kabandha, proceeded along the path to the west leading to Lake Pampa. Wending their way, desirous of finding Sugriva, they gazed on the many trees laden with flowers and fruit, tasting of nectar, growing on the mountain-sides. Passing the night on a plateau, those two Descendants of Raghu reached the western bank of the Pampa abounding in lotuses and beheld Shabari’s pleasant retreat.

Approaching that charming hermitage, shaded on all sides by innumerable trees, they beheld that perfected One who, seeing them, rose up and with joined palms touched the feet of Rama and the prudent Lakshmana and, according to tradition, offered water to rinse their mouths and bathe their feet.

Thereupon Rama addressed that female ascetic, fixed in her spiritual duty, and said:—“Hast you overcome all obstacles to asceticism, O You of gentle speech? Do thine austerities increase daily? Hast you subdued thine anger and your need for food? O Solitary One, hast you observed your vows and attained inner tranquillity? Has thine attendance on your Guru borne fruit?”

Thus interrogated by Rama, the virtuous Shabari, revered by the Gods, extremely aged, standing before him, offered him homage and said:—

“Blessed by your presence, I have acquired perfection and my asceticism is crowned. To-day my birth has borne fruit and the service of my Gurus has been fully honoured. To-day my pious practices have found fulfilment. O Foremost of Men, Greatest of the Celestials, worshipping you, I shall attain the heavenly realm. O Gentle One, O Slayer of your Foes, O You who dost confer honour on men, purified by your compassionate regard, I shall, by your favour, attain the imperishable worlds, O Subduer of Your Foes.

“When you didst set foot on the Mount Cittrakuta, those ascetics I served, ascending celestial cars of incomparable splendour, departed to heaven and those great sages, conversant with virtue, said to me:—

“‘Rama will visit your holy retreat; do you receive him and Lakshmana with traditional hospitality. On beholding him, you shalt attain the highest sphere from whence none returns.’

“O Foremost of Men, thus did those blessed ascetics address me, and for you I have gathered the wild fruits of diverse kinds that grow on the borders of Lake Pampa.”

Hearing these words, Raghava said to her, who had not been left in ignorance by her Gurus concerning the past and the future:—

“I have heard the truth about the greatness of your Gurus from Danu and now I would fain witness it with mine own eyes, if you judgest it fitting.”

Listening to these words falling from Rama’s own lips, Shabari, guiding the two brothers to the vast forest, addressed them, saying:—

“O Raghunanda, behold this forest resembling a dark cloud, filled with birds and beasts, known as the Matanga Wood. Here my Gurus of pure soul sacrificed unto fire, their persons consecrated by mantras through which they had purified them, thus consecrating the forest and rendering it a holy place. Here too is the altar facing the west, where, with hands trembling with fatigue, my worshipful preceptors offered flowers to their Gods. O Foremost of the Raghus, behold this altar of incomparable beauty, which, through the power of their penances, still sheds its lustre illumining the four regions. Behold also the Seven Seas, drawn here by virtue of their thought, since, through fasting and the weight of years, they were unable to walk. These robes of bark, left hanging on the trees by them at the completion of their ablutions, are still wet and the lotuses of azure hue offered by them in worship have not faded.

“Now you have seen the forest and hast heard all that you didst desire to know; I will abandon my body so that I may approach those pure-souled ascetics whom I used to wait upon, to whom this hermitage belongs and whose servant I am.”

Hearing these pious words, Rama, who was accompanied by Lakshmana, experienced great delight and exclaimed: “Wonderful it is!” Thereafter, addressing Shabari of ascetic practices, he said:—

“O Holy One, I have been fully honoured by you; now repair whither you will and be happy.”

Having received permission from Rama to depart, Shabari, wearing matted locks, robes of bark and a black antelope skin, cast herself into the fire, thereafter rising into the air like a bright flame.

Adorned with celestial ornaments, wreathed in garlands, emitting a divine fragrance, sprinkled with sandal-paste and clad in celestial raiment, she appeared exquisite and illumined the heavens like a flash of lightning. By virtue of her meditations she ascended to those sacred abodes where her spiritual preceptors, those high-souled ascetics, dwelt.