King Dasaratha, having acquainted his son Rama with the knowledge of his approaching regency, now called his spiritual preceptor, Shri Vasishtha, and addressed him, saying: “O Sage, whose only wealth is austerity, graciously approach Shri Rama and cause him to observe a fast with Princess Sita in preparation for his coronation.”

Shri Vasishtha answering, “Be it so”, went himself to Shri Rama’s palace. Ascending a chariot drawn by two horses, he drove to the palace, and entering by the three gates, approached the abode of Raghava, white as a cloud.

Shri Rama hearing of the arrival of his preceptor, speedily went forth to welcome him and offer him due obeisance. Taking him by the hand, he assisted him to alight from the chariot and, studying his mood, made enquiries as to his well-being.

The venerable Vasishtha said: “O Rama, your royal parent is gracious to you, to-morrow you shalt be proclaimed ruler of the kingdom, do you observe a fast to-day. To-morrow, King Dasaratha will install you as regent, as Nahusha of old made over his kingdom to Yayati.”

Having uttered these words, the knower of truth, the sovereign of munis, requested Rama and Sita to observe a fast that night.

Then Shri Ramacandra respectfully saluted Shri Vasishtha, and the royal preceptor accepting his salutation departed for his abode.

Conversing delightfully with his friends, Shri Rama, when requested by them, retired to the inner apartments. The palace of Raghava was crowded with joyful men and women, and resembled a lake filled with lotuses visited by innumerable birds.

Leaving the palace, Shri Vasishtha perceived the streets to be filled with people. All the roads entering Ayodhya were so crowded with spectators eager to witness Shri Rama’s coronation that none could pass to and fro without difficulty. The sound of the multitudes shouting with joy, filling the highways, resembled the roaring of the sea.

All the streets of the capital were swept and sprinkled with water; on either side, flower garlands were hanging, and every house was decorated with flags and banners. Men and women, children and the aged, all anxiously awaiting the dawn, so that they might witness the sacred ceremony, looked forward with eagerness to the great festival that would promote their happiness.

The priest Shri Vasishtha, avoiding the crowded streets, at length reached the royal palace. Ascending the balcony which resembled a white cloud, he greeted the king as Brihaspati pays homage to Indra.

Seeing the sage approaching, the king rose and enquired as to what Shri Rama had said. Shri Vasishtha answered, “All is prepared”. As the king rose from his throne, the whole assembly stood up to honour the venerable sage.

Having heard his spiritual preceptor’s report, the king, dismissing the court, withdrew to the inner apartment, as a lion enters its cave. Entering those gorgeous and richly ornamented apartments equal to one of Indra’s palaces, he resembled the moon gliding through the heavens.