The night being over, King Dasaratha, glad in heart, accompanied by his spiritual preceptor and relations, summoned his chief minister, Sumantra, and said:—

“Let the officers of the treasury take with them wealth and jewels in abundance and precede us in good order. Let the four divisions of my army hold themselves in readiness and let chariots and palanquins be prepared. Let my commands be carried out with promptitude. Suffer Shri Vasishtha, Vamadeva, Javali, Kashyapa, Bhrigu, Markandeya and Katya-yana with other learned and holy men to lead the procession. Make ready the royal chariot, let there be no delay, King Janaka’s messengers are eager to return.”

Then the mighty King Dasaratha attended by the holy sages set out on the journey followed by his army. Passing four nights on the road, they entered the capital of King Janaka, who, having commanded the city to be decorated, advanced to pay honour to his royal guests. Approaching the aged sovereign Dasaratha, King Janaka was filled with joy, and addressed him with cheerful words, saying: “O Great King, I bid you welcome, fortunate indeed am I that you have been gracious enough to honour me with your presence. Now shall you have the felicity of looking on your two sons. Twice blessed am I that Shri Vasishtha, attended by other learned sages, has come hither also, as it were Indra in the midst of the gods. Every impediment to the wedding ceremony has been withdrawn and this ancient dynasty, by the alliance with the House of Raghu, will acquire new lustre. O Illustrious Sovereign, to-morrow at the completion of the sacrifice, having consulted with the sages, be gracious enough to celebrate the nuptials.”

The eloquent monarch, Dasaratha, seated amidst the sages, answered: “I have ever heard that those who receive charity are subject to the conferrer of that charity! O You acquainted with virtue, it is ours to defer to you in all things.”

Hearing the speech of the truthful sovereign, King Dasaratha, King Janaka was filled with astonishment.

All the sages then coming together, passed the night in converse, mutually delighting each other.

King Dasaratha, being united with his sons was filled with happiness and surrendered himself wholly to King Janaka’s hospitality.

The magnanimous sovereign of Mithila, having completed the orders for the preparations of the wedding ceremony, retired to rest.