Whilst Shri Mahadeva was engaged in yogic meditation, the devas, under the leadership of Agni, went to the region of Brahma where, with Indra, they paid reverence to the Lord of the world, and said: “O Lord, at the beginning of creation you did’st make Shri Mahadeva our leader, but he has now retired to the Himalayas and is engaged in the practice of austerity with Uma. O You who art desirous of the good of the world, do what you considerest ought to be done, you are our only refuge.”

Then Shri Brahma encouraged the devas, with gentle words, saying: “O Devas, the curse of Uma Devi, that you should remain without offspring is irrevocable, but the fire god Agni will cause Ganga to bear a son who will destroy the enemies of the gods. The youngest daughter of Himancala (Uma) will look upon her sister’s son as her own and will inevitably lavish her affection on him.”

“O Rama, the words of Shri Brahma filled the gods with satisfaction and they offered obeisance to him. Then they all circumambulated Mount Kailasha, the repository of precious metals, and begged Agni to beget a son.

“Agni acquiesced in their request and approaching Shri Ganga, said:

‘O Devi, let us beget a son for it is the wish of the gods.’

“Assuming the form of a celestial nymph, Ganga, inspired the fire god to plant his seed in her, her every vein being filled with splendour.

After a time, she addressed Agni, saying:

‘O Deva, I am unable to bear the ever-increasing splendour which you have communicated to me. My body is burning like fire, my mind is agitated and I am filled with fear.’

“Agni replied:

‘O Sinless One, place this foetus near the Himalayas.’

“Then Ganga Devi expelled the resplendent being, shining like gold. This substance, falling on the earth, became the purest gold that can be found. All objects in its proximity became silver and the more distant areas exposed to its penetrating rays became copper, the baser parts becoming zinc and lead. In this way, its brilliance was transmuted into metals and spread abroad and the mountains and forests near by were changed to gold. O Rama, gold being produced in that dazzling form is called jatarupa (form-bom) and, O Hero, that is why gold shines like fire. The grass, the creepers, the shrubs, all were converted into gold, and from that splendour was born Kumara.

“The devas with Indra engaged the Krittikas to nurse the child and they regarded him as their own son.

The gods named the child Karttikeya and said:

‘He shall be our son and he will be renowned in the three worlds.’

“The Krittikas bathed the child and as he grew, his form resembled the fire. Because the infant was born prematurely, the devas called him Skanda.

“The nurses began to nourish the child with milk and he shone like a flame. With six mouths he sucked the milk of six nurses at the same time. Soon he grew so powerful that while yet an infant he challenged groups of demons to combat. Then all the gods appointed him their commander-in-chief. The Devas and Agni paid affectionate homage to this child.

“O Rama, this is the inspiring and merit-bestowing story of Shri Ganga and Karttikeya.

“O Raghava, on this earth, those who read this narrative with faith and devotion shall have long lives, sons and grandsons and obtain the divine region of Skanda.”