As Rama hastened on, his left eye began to twitch; he stumbled and was seized with a fit of trembling. Observing these inauspicious signs, he enquired repeatedly of Lakshmana:—“Can all be well with Sita?”

Eager to see her again, he quickened his pace and hastened on, but when he reached the hermitage, he found it deserted and, filled with apprehension, began to run hither and thither, searching everywhere. To that descendant of Raghu, his thatched hut, without Sita, appeared like a lake bereft of lotuses, shorn of its beauty at the end of summer.

Seeing the deserted hermitage, with its trees that seemed to be weeping,its flowers faded, the deer and the birds melancholy, bereft of charm, wholly desolate, the forest Deities having forsaken it, the mats and deer-skins lying here and there, the grassy seats withered and trampled upon, Rama began to weep and cry out:—

“Has that timid one been carried away or killed or devoured or is she drowned or has she hidden herself in the forest? Perchance she has not yet returned from gathering fruit and flowers or she has gone to bring back water from the pools or the river?”

Faint with seeking, without finding any trace of his beloved in the forest, running from tree to tree, scaling the hills, searching by river and stream, lamenting the while and overcome with grief, he appeared like one struggling in a morass!

“O Kedumbra Tree”, he cried, “hast you not seen my dear one, who cherished you? If you knowest aught, then tell me where the lovely Sita can be found? O Bilva Tree! Say hast you seen her, who wears a silken robe, who is as fair as the young green shoots and whose breasts resemble your fruit? Or you, O Arjuna Tree 1 Give me tidings of the one who loved you, that daughter of Janaka; dost that frail creature still live? This Kadubha Tree knows for certain of Maithili, whose thighs resemble its fruit, and here stands the beautiful Vanaspati enveloped in flowering creepers, buds and leaves, in whose shade the bees hum, undoubtedly you are the crown of trees 1 Surely this Tilaka who loved Sita knows where she is now! O Ashoka Tree, dispeller of grief, prove the truth of your name and allay the pain pressing on my heart by disclosing my loved one to me without delay. O Tala Tree, have pity on me and if you have seen that fair damsel, whose breasts resemble your ripe fruit, do you tell me! O Jambu Tree, if you have seen my dear love, whose radiance resembles the Jambunada, then speak without fear, and you, the first of the Karnikara trees, whose flowers are of surpassing loveliness, O Gentle One, say, hast you seen my Beloved?”

Thus did the illustrious Rama question every tree, Cuta, Nipa, giant Sala, Panasa, Kuravasa, also Vakula, Punnaga, Candana and Ketaka trees, running hither and thither in the forest like one demented.

Thereafter he addressed the beasts, saying: “O Deer, do you not know where Maithili is to be found, whose eyes resembled a gazelle’s, who with her doe-like glances was followed by the fawns she had tamed? O Elephant, methinks you dost know her, whose thighs resembled your trunk: pray tell me, hast you seen her? O Tiger, if you have seen my gentle spouse, whose countenance resembled the moon in radiance, then tell me fearlessly.

“Why art you hiding, O My Beloved? I see you, O Lotuseyed One! Do not conceal thyself amidst the trees without replying! Stay! Stay! O Princess of lovely Limbs, hast you no pity for me? Why dost you mock me? It is not your nature to yield thyself to this folly, O Lady of Fair Complexion, it is vain for you to fly me, your yellow sari renders you easily distinguishable, I have seen you! Stay, if you have any love for me I Alas! It is not she—my Sita of gracious smiles! Without doubt, she has perished since my grief leaves her unmoved!

“Assuredly that youthful woman has been devoured in mine absence; Sita, with her lovely countenance, exquisite teeth and lips, shapely nose and beautiful earrings, whose skin resembles the winter jasmine, has perished, and her beauty is extinguished, as the full moon under eclipse. The slender neck of my well-beloved, of the hue of sandal, adorned with a necklace, has been devoured, like that of one poor and helpless, possessing neither kith nor kin.

“O Mighty-armed One, dost you not see my loved one anywhere? O Where hast you gone, O Sita, O My Lovely One?”

Thus did Rama lament, and calling, ran from grove to grove, sometimes turning like a whirlwind, sometimes appearing like one who has lost his wits. Intent on finding his love, ranging the forest, scaling the mountain, exploring the rivers and waterfalls, he sped through the woodlands without rest.

Searching on every side without pause, seeking Maithili throughout the forest, hoping to find his Beloved, he became utterly exhausted.