Shri Sita hearing Rama’s words, was greatly distressed and with tears coursing down her cheeks, answered in a low voice:—

“O Rama, the sufferings of a life in the forest described by you, will, through my love for you be transmuted to joys. Deer, bear, lions, elephants, sarabhas, birds, bulls and other woodland beasts, on beholding your matchless countenance, will flee away stricken with terror. All fear you, O Lord! Instructed by my elders to remain in your company, it behoves me to go with you; separated from you, I cannot live. When near to you, O Rama, even Indra the King of the Devas dare not do me injury. O Rama, you have taught me that a woman must not be parted from her lord. O Most Wise Lord, long ago, in my father’s house, I was told by one conversant with the movements of the planets that I should have to dwell in the forest. O Mighty One, since I was told by that brahmin skilled in occult sciences, of my life in the forest with you, I have looked forward to the time with joy. O, what felicity to live with you in the forest! O Dear One, you must grant me permission to go to the forest with you. I must go with you, it cannot be otherwise, thus shall I prove my fidelity, enjoined by my elders. The time for the fulfilment of the brahmin’s prophecy is at hand. O Hero, I know all the miseries of life in the forest, but it is those of unsubdued mind who suffer them. While still living in my father’s house, a pious and saintly woman predicted in the presence of my mother, that I should live in the forest. O My Lord, formerly I have begged you to let me sport with you in the woods. The time is now come, grant my prayer and let me go with you! O Prince, may the undertaking be propitious. Glad am I to accompany you to the forest, to serve you there will be my great delight. O Lord, relinquishing envy, accompanying you in the forest, all my sins will be washed away through my devotion to you. I have no other god but you, if death overtakes me I shall not experience happiness in the other world without you. I have heard from the brahmins that a woman given by her father according to the sacred ordinance to a man, becomes his wife in this world and also in the other world. O Prince of Beautiful Locks, in perfect devotion to you, filled with humility, regarding pain and pleasure as equal, sharing your austerities, permit me to accompany you. If you are still unwilling to take me, a woman distressed, to the forest, then I will seek death by poison or drowning.”

In this wise, Sita entreated Rama to let her accompany him, but still the great prince was unwilling to consent. Seeing Rama disinclined to grant her request, Sita was filled with grief, and her hot tears fell, moistening the earth. Shri Rama, seeing the princess flushed with anxiety and indignation still sought to divert her from her purpose.