Bharata having slept on the same spot where Shri Rama had lately rested, and the night being over, called Shatrughna, and said to him: “Arise, O Brother, may good attend you! The day has dawned, sleep no more! Please summon Guha, the chief of the Nishadas, so that he may convey our army across the river.”

Shatrughna answered: “O Noble One, I am awake. I was not able to sleep, for like you I have been meditating on Shri Rama!”

As these two, the chiefs of men, stood conversing together, Guha approaching, said with humility: “O Prince, didst you rest at ease, on the river bank? Did any disturbance visit you or thine army?”

Hearing these words of Guha uttered with affection, Shri Bharata answered him, saying: “O King, we have passed this night in peace, having been highly honoured by you. Now let your servants convey our army over the river.”

Guha hastily returned to his city and spake thus to his servants and relatives: “Brothers, arise, awake, may you ever be fortunate! Bring boats to the bank and convey the army over the river!”

Thus addressed, the ferrymen arose and gathering five hundred boats together, brought them to the bank. A special barge that was seaworthy, named “Svastika”, hung with large bells and flying banners with apertures for air, was also furnished, whereon white woollen rugs were spread like carpets, small bells tinkling melodiously when it sailed. This barque was steered by Guha himself. On it stepped the illustrious Princes Bharata and Shatrughna with the Queens Kaushalya and Sumitra, and other ladies of high degree, preceded by their spiritual preceptors, the priests and learned brahmins; finally, the baggage was loaded.

At the time of departure, the noise of those burning the residue left by the army, of those who plunged into the holy Ganges and the porters bearing the baggage, ascended to the sky. The boats, crowded with attendants, guarded by picked ferrymen, sailing swiftly, conveyed them over the river. Many vessels contained women only, while others were filled with horses or bullocks, carts, cattle and mules.

Reaching the other bank of the river, the people disembarked, the ferrymen and Guha’s relatives playing diverse games in the water as they returned. Some of the elephants, resembling mountains as they moved, were driven across by their mahouts, others crossed in boats, some on rafts and some swam. Guha’s servants ferried the army over the river, before taking their morning bath. During the period of Maitra, following on the sunrise, the army crossed the sacred stream and entered the charming forest.

Arriving at holy Prayaga, the magnanimous Bharata spoke encouraging words to the army and ordered them to camp at ease. Then the prince accompanied by the Guru Vasishtha and other priests, went to see the Sage Bharadvaja.

Approaching the hermitage of that learned and illumined sage, the son of Brihaspati, they beheld in the dense and delightful forest, charming huts thatched with leaves.