Thus commanded by the imperious King of the Titans, Marica replied in bold and fearless tones, saying:—

“What wretch has counselled you to take this course, which will lead to thine extinction, together with your children, your kingdom and your counsellors, O Ranger of the Night? O King, who is that evil person, envious of your good fortune, who seeks to open the portals of death to you? Assuredly he is thine enemy, who in his impotence plots your defeat under the blows of a superior antagonist. What miscreant of evil intent seeks to propel you along the path of self-destruction? The counsellors, who do not dissuade you from your fell design, merit death and yet live. Upright ministers ever restrain a king, who following his own desires, enters on an evil path. You who should thus be guided art blind.

“By the grace of their sovereign, ministers attain justice, profit, pleasure and renown, but these objects are never found, O Ravana, if a king be lacking in virtue, and his people suffer nought but misfortune.

“O You, Foremost of Conquerors, the king is the root of the righteousness and good repute of his subjects, he should therefore always be protected by them. No kingdom survives under a sovereign who is violent, overbearing and intemperate, O Ranger of the Night. Those ministers who counsel violence perish with their chief, as a chariot is precipitated into an abyss by a reckless driver. Many pious persons in this world, engaged in their duties, have met with destruction with their relatives through the fault of others. A cruel despot is as unable to protect his subjects as a jackal is unable to defend a herd of deer. The titans, whose lord you are, foolish, ruthless and a slave to your passions, are doomed.

“It is not I who should be pitied for this unexpected calamity that has overtaken me, but you, who with thine army will soon meet with destruction. Having been struck down by Rama, he will speedily despatch you. My mission accomplished, I shall meet my death under the blows of thine adversary. Rest assured that I shall perish as soon as I appear before Rama and know well that the abduction of Sita will cost you your life as well as that of your kinsmen.

“If you succeedest in bearing Sita away from the hermitage with mine aid, it is the end of you, of Lanka and of the titans.

“Though seeking your good and desiring to be of assistance to you, you dost disregard my words, as those for whom the last hour has struck do not heed the counsel of their friends.”