Once upon a time, during a big battle, brave monkey Angada shouted to his friends.  Hearing him, all the strong monkeys ran to join the fight!

They felt strong and brave again. They were ready to fight, even if it meant dying.  The monkeys picked up big trees and rocks to throw at the giant Kumbhakarna. Kumbhakarna was HUGE and angry! He swung his big club and knocked down tons of monkeys – seven hundred and eight thousand! He even grabbed handfuls of monkeys and squeezed them!

The monkeys, scared but brave, kept fighting.  One strong monkey, Dvivida, threw a huge rock. It missed Kumbhakarna, but it crashed into the giant's army, smashing chariots and elephants!  The giants fought back with their arrows, killing many monkeys.

The monkeys fought back, too!  They threw more trees and rocks.  Hanuman, a super-strong monkey, flew high in the sky and rained down rocks and trees.  But Kumbhakarna was too strong! He swung his giant club, and Hanuman, trying to stop him, got hit by a spear.  Hanuman screamed, and the monkeys started to run away.

Then other strong monkeys – Nila, Rishabha, Sharabha, Gavaksha, and Gandamadhana – jumped on Kumbhakarna. They hit him with rocks and their fists, but Kumbhakarna barely felt it! He grabbed Rishabha and squeezed him.  He hit the others, too, and they all fell down.

Even more monkeys jumped on Kumbhakarna. They climbed all over him, biting and scratching!  But Kumbhakarna was like a mountain! He squeezed and squeezed them, and many monkeys went into his mouth! He ate them, but they came out of his ears and nose!  He was like a giant fire, burning up all the monkeys.

Seeing this, Angada got angry and threw a big rock at Kumbhakarna, but the giant hit him back, and Angada fell down. Then Kumbhakarna went after Sugriva, the monkey king.

Sugriva was brave! He told Kumbhakarna, "You've already killed so many! Why fight me?"  Sugriva threw a huge rock at Kumbhakarna, and it cracked his chest. But Kumbhakarna was still strong! He threw his spear at Sugriva, but Hanuman caught it and broke it!  Kumbhakarna got really mad. He ripped off a huge piece of a mountain and threw it at Sugriva, knocking him out.  Kumbhakarna carried the knocked-out Sugriva back to his city, Lanka.

Hanuman saw Sugriva get taken away, but he waited.  He wanted Sugriva to save himself. While Kumbhakarna was getting celebrated, Sugriva woke up.  He used his strong teeth and claws to tear Kumbhakarna’s ears and nose!  Kumbhakarna threw Sugriva away, and Sugriva quickly flew back to Rama.


Kumbhakarna was angry.  He grabbed a giant hammer and started smashing and eating monkeys, giants, and bears!  More monkeys ran away. But then, Lakshmana, Rama's brother, jumped into the fight. He shot many arrows at Kumbhakarna, but Kumbhakarna wasn't hurt much!  Kumbhakarna wanted to fight Rama!


He went to find Rama, but Rama shot many arrows at him!  Kumbhakarna roared and fought back, even without any weapons, but his arms got cut off. Then his legs were cut.  Rama shot many more arrows into Kumbhakarna’s mouth, until Kumbhakarna fell.  Finally, Rama shot one last arrow, and Kumbhakarna’s head fell off!

Kumbhakarna was dead! The good guys cheered, and the earth shook! Everyone was so happy that the evil Kumbhakarna was finally defeated.  Rama, the brave king, had won.
