Hearing Vaidehi’s speech, inspired by conjugal tenderness, Rama, his energy enhanced, replied to the daughter of Janaka, saying:—

“O Noble Lady, it is in appropriate words, dictated by thine affection, that you have sought to instruct me in the duties of my caste.

“How shall I answer you, O Princess? You thyself hast said:

‘Warriors bear their bows, so that the word “oppression” may not be heard on earth.’

O Sita, it is on account of those ascetics of severe penances, beset with perils in the Dandaka Forest, who have sought my protection, that I have come hither. Dwelling in the forest at all times, where they live on fruit and roots, they are unable to enjoy a peaceful existence on account of the titans, O Timid Lady. These hermits of the Dandaka Forest are devoured by those terrible demons, who live on human flesh. ‘Come to our aid’ was the cry of those excellent Twice-born, and when I heard those words falling from their lips, I promised to obey them and answered ‘Fear not’! It was a source of the greatest distress to me to see them kneeling at my feet, when it was I who should have been touching theirs.”

“‘What do you desire of me?’, I enquired of that assembly of the Twice-born, whereupon, drawing near, they spoke the following words:—

“‘In the Dandaka Forest, innumerable demons, assuming different forms, torment us cruelly. O Rama, do you protect us! The time of the Homa sacrifice and the days of the full moon have come, O Irreproachable Prince! You are the sure refuge of all the saints and ascetics who harassed by the titans seek your protection. By the power of our asceticism it were easy for us to destroy these Rangers of the Night, but we are loath to lose the fruits of austerity, earned over a long period.

“‘Prolonged penance is subject to innumerable hindrances, and is exceedingly hard, O Rama 1 For this reason we refrain from pronouncing a curse on these demons, though they devour us. Tormented thus by the titans who frequent the Dandaka Forest, we implore you and your brother to protect us; you are our support.’”

“Hearing these words, I promised my protection to the sages of the Dandaka Forest, O Daughter of Janaka 1

“As long as I live, therefore, I cannot violate the promise given to the ascetics.

“I may yield up my life or even you, O Sita, as well as Lakshmana, but I cannot be false to a vow made to brahmins.

“Even had I not promised them anything, O Vaidehi, it is my bounden duty to protect the sages; how much more so now!

“I am pleased with you, O Sita, for one does not offer advice to those one does not love. Your words are worthy of you, O Beautiful One. By pursuing the path of duty you have become dearer to me than life itself.”

Having spoken thus to Sita, the daughter of the King of Mithila, the magnanimous Rama, carrying his bow, continued to roam through those ravishing solitudes with Lakshmana.