Guha addressed Shri Lakshmana who was humbly guarding his royal brother, and said: “O Friend, rest at ease on this soft bed prepared for you. We are fitted for the forest life, but you accustomed to ease, rest now, we will watch during the night and guard Shri Rama from harm, none is dearer to me on earth, I swear to you in truth. To gratify Shri Rama, I will acquire fame, righteousness, wealth and pleasure. I, with my bow and arrow, attended by my kindred, will watch over Shri Rama, now asleep with Sita. Wandering daily in the forest, nothing there is unknown to me, even if a powerful enemy attacked me in the forest, I could withstand him.”

Lakshmana answered: “I have full faith in the power of your protection, nor do I fear any, but how, forgetful of dharma, can I refrain from watching over Shri Rama? Beholding the chief heir of Dasaratha, sovereign of the earth, lying on the ground with the daughter of King Janaka, how should I dare to rest while he is sleeping?”

See Nishada! That Mighty Prince, Shri Rama, whom none dared challenge, sleeps on a bed of straw. That Great One obtained by King Dasaratha by the merit of charity, austerity and devotion, having become an ascetic, his aged sire will not long survive and then will the earth become a widow. O Nishada, I deem the women wailing and lamenting at our departure have become silent and the royal palace also, but I fear the king, Kaushalya and my mother, will not outlast this night. Consoled by Shatrughna, my mother may endure a little while, but Queen Kaushalya, the mother of this hero, will surely yield up her life without Rama. Alas! Ayodhya, the repository of wealth and inhabited by those who love Rama, will perish through the distress caused by the king’s death. How can the king live without beholding his beloved and virtuous eldest son? Queen Kaushalya also will perish, nor can my mother long survive Kaushalya’s death. Alas! The whole structure of the king’s purpose has fallen in ruins; desiring to appoint Rama as his regent, he will leave this world still cherishing this hope. He is fortunate who, attending the last hours of the king, performs his obsequies—and then ranges the city full of charming courts, palaces and temples with intersecting streets where lovely courtesans are seen; that city abounding in splendid chariots, horses and elephants, resounding with trumpets, possessing every amenity, filled with happy people, enriched by parks and gardens where conferences and joyous gatherings are held daily. When shall we, returning from the forest, walk in the royal city? May King Dasaratha continue to live, so that we may behold that excellent monarch on our return, with Shri Rama the Upholder of Truth.”

Thus lamenting and afflicted, Shri Lakshmana, keeping watch over Rama, passed the night. Prince Lakshmana uttering words of truth and affection concerning his parents and elders, spoke thus to Guha who, grieving and disquieted, wept like an elephant in pain.

