Shri Lakshmana being present, hearing the converse of Rama and Sita, was afflicted and unable to restrain his grief, and weeping bitterly, spoke as follows: “If you are resolved to enter the forest in which dwell many wild beasts and elephants, I will accompany you with my bow and arrows. I will wander with you in the beautiful forest to the delightful sounds of birds and deer abounding there. O Ramacandra, without you I do not care to dwell even in the region of the gods nor do I desire immortality or dominion over other abodes.”

Seeing Prince Lakshmana determined to accompany him to the forest, Shri Ramacandra sought to dissuade him, but Shri Lakshmana answered: “O Brother, having already granted me permission to accompany you, why dost you now prohibit me? O Sinless One, I would fain know what prevents you from taking me with you; my mind is clouded with fears.”

Shri Ramacandra perceiving Lakshmana humbly standing before him ready to accompany him, said: “O Lakshmana, you are most dear to me, virtuous, brave and constantly engaged in righteous deeds, you are as dear to me as my life. You are my younger brother, my servant and my friend. If I grant your request, who will protect the renowned Kaushalya and Sumitra in thine absence? O Brother, the king who granted their desires, as a cloud responds to the need of the earth, is still under the bondage of pleasure desire. When Kaikeyi, the daughter of King Ashvapatti, becomes the queen mother, she will not treat her rival consorts well. She will not heed the needs and comforts of Queen Kaushalya and Sumitra, nor will Bharata, governed by his mother, respect them. Therefore, O Lakshmana, remaining here, winning the king’s favour, render Queen Kaushalya happy. O Brother, heed my instruction. O Knower of Dharma, acting thus, you will demonstrate your great devotion to me and also serve your mother and thereby earn great merit. O Lakshmana, reflecting on these words, follow my injunction. Bereft of us, our mothers cannot be happy.”

Rama having uttered these words, the eloquent Lakshmana replied in gentle accents: “O Hero, Bharata will assuredly have due regard for the Queens Kaushalya and Sumitra. If Bharata, having obtained this mighty kingdom, through evil counsel and pride should not protect the queens, I will assuredly slay that wicked wretch. O Noble One, Mother Kaushalya can well command thousands like me. That illustrious queen can easily protect my mother and herself and countless others. Make me your humble attendant, there is no wrong in this. Thus shall my highest desire be accomplished and you shalt also find satisfaction. Armed with my bow and arrows, a spade and basket, gathering wild fruit and flowers, I shall precede you, pointing out the way. Each day, I shall provide you with ascetic’s food, leaves and other suitable offerings. Do you, with the daughter of the King of Videha, enjoy thyself on the mountain slopes. Sleeping or waking, I shall do all for you.”

Shri Ramacandra listened to the loving words of Shri Lakshmana with delight and answered: “O Lakshmana, seek the permission of your mother Sumitra, and other relatives to go with me. O Lakshmana, fetch, without delay, the dread bows given by Varuna himself to Rajarishi Janaka at the time of the great sacrifice, also the impenetrable armour and the celestial quivers, the two swords bright as the sun, decorated with gold, which King Janaka presented to me at the time of my nuptials and which were deposited with care in the house of Shri Vasishta.”

Knowing his exile to be certain, Shri Lakshmana bade farewell to his relatives and, bringing the weapons decorated with fresh flowers from the home of Shri Vasishtha, presented them to Ram.

Then Shri Ramacandra spoke joyfully to Lakshmana and said: “O Handsome Prince, you are welcome at this hour, O Bi ther, I desire to offer all my substance in charity to the brahirins and ascetics, do you assist me. To those brahmins dwelling in the city devoted to their Guru, to them and to my servants distribute all my wealth. Summon the excellent Suyajna, the son of Shri Vasishtha, and bid him come here without delay. Having duly honoured him and other pious brahmins, I shall set out for the forest.”