Hearing that cry of distress, which seems to come from her lord, Sita said to Lakshmana:—

“Dost you not recognise the voice of Raghava? Go quickly and see what has befallen him. Hearing his cry, my heart is filled with anxiety; he must be in great peril to call out thus; go to the assistance of your brother, he is in need of you. He has been overpowered by the titans like a bull by lions.”

Recollecting Rama’s command, Lakshmana withstood Sita’s appeal and did not move, whereupon Janaki, highly provoked, said to him:—

“O Son of Sumitra, under the guise of affection you dost show emnity towards your brother, since you dost not instantly proceed to his aid! Because of me, Rama is about to die! In your desire to possess me, you dost refuse to follow Raghava; you dost welcome his death and hast no affection for him. It is for this reason that you dost remain indifferent to his plight; if he is in peril, of what use is my life? It is on his account that I came hither.”

Thus, weeping and overcome with grief, did Vaidehi speak, and Lakshmana answering her, who was trembling like a frightened doe, said:—

“O Vaidehi, neither serpents, titans, celestial beings, Gods, giants nor demons can overcome your lord. Assuredly, O Princess, among Gods and Kinneras, wild beasts and goblins, there are none who can stand against Rama in battle. O Beautiful One, he who is equal to Indra is invincible. Do not speak thus! I dare not leave you alone in the forest without Rama.

“Even the Three Worlds and the Gods, with Indra Himself at their head, meeting Rama in combat, would be overcome by him, therefore calm thyself and banish all fear. Your lord will soon return, having killed the marvellous deer; that voice is assuredly not his, nor that of a God; it is an illusion, like the city of the Gandharvas and has been produced by the titan.

“O Vaidehi, you have been left in my charge by the magnanimous Rama. O Fair One, I dare not leave you here alone. We are an object of hatred to the titans since the slaying of Khara and the destruction of Janasthana. The titans are able to simulate the voices of others in the great forest and delight in doing so in order to trouble the virtuous. O Vaidehi, have no anxiety I”

At these words, Sita, her eyes flashing with anger, answered:—

“O You Evil-hearted Wretch, Obloquy of your Race, who delightest in Rama’s misfortune! Is it a source of wonder that a villain such as you, perverse, whose motives are concealed, should speak thus in the hour of Rama’s distress? By an excess of perfidy, you have accompanied Rama to the forest and, practising guile, lusteth after me, while assuming the form of a friend 1 Or hast you been engaged by Bharata as his agent? Your design as also Bharata’s, shall not succeed, O Saumitri! How should I desire another after serving the lotus-eyed Rama as my lord? Rather would I yield up my life in your presence, O Saumitri; without Rama, I cannot maintain life on this earth for an instant.”

Hearing these cruel words, causing him to shudder, Lakshmana, the master of his senses, with joined palms answered her, saying:—

“It is not for me to gainsay you; you are as a goddess to me. An ill-considered utterance from a woman causes no surprise. Negligent in her duty, fickle and peevish, woman is the cause of dissension between father and son; truly I am unable to endure these words of thine that pierce my ears like flaming darts, O Daughter of Janaka! O Vaidehi, may all the inhabitants of the forest bear witness that to my respectful address you have responded with such bitterness! It will go hard with you this day for having set me at nought, I, who am obedient to the behests of mine elder brother! May all the Deities protect you, O Lady of Large Eyes! Sinister portents present themselves to me! May I find you safe when I return!”

At these words, the daughter of Janaka began to weep and scalding tears bathed her countenance as she answered:—

“If I am separated from Rama, I shall cast myself into the river Godaveri! O Lakshmana, I shall hang myself or enter into the fire, but I shall never approach any man other than Raghava!”

Thus protesting before Lakshmana, Sita, distraught, beat her breast with her hands and lamented.

In the face of her despair, Lakshmana, distressed, sought to comfort her, but she refused to answer the brother of her lord, whereupon he, bending low before her, set out to rejoin Rama, looking back again and again.