When night had given way to the dawn, brahmins well-versed in the Veda, together with the king’s priests, came to the palace gate. With them came the counsellors, the chiefs of the army and leading merchants to witness the installation of Rama.

The sun having risen and the Pushya planet with Karrata being auspicious, it being the time at which Rama was born, brahmins brought vessels of gold filled with water, a finely decorated throne and a resplendent chariot with a seat spread with a tiger skin. Water was brought from the confluence of the Ganga and Yamuna and from the holy rivers, lakes and wells, from the westward flowing streams and those descending from great heights and flowing through the plains. From the seas also water was provided and stored in shining vessels of gold and silver, wherein lotus blooms floated and on whose surface sticks of Gular and banyan were sprinkled.

Honey, curds, clarified butter, kusha grass, and flowers were also provided. Beautifully adorned singing women were likewise present. Camaras with handles of gold set with jewels, a beautiful canopy, scintillating and round as the moon, were furnished for the ceremony, also a white caparisoned steed, a young elephant of great size, and eight virgins gracefully attired.

Musicians with vinas, bards and those who proclaim the king’s praise; everything required for the installation of a sovereign of the dynasty of Ikshvaku was furnished by command of the king. Not beholding King Dasaratha at the appointed time, those present said: “Who will announce our arrival to the monarch? The sun has risen, but the king has not come forth; every preparation for the installation of Rama is now complete.”

While they were thus speaking, Sumantra, honoured servant of the state, addressed the royal guests, and maharajahs, saying: “As commanded by the king, I purpose to bring Shri Rama before him. On my return, I will ask his majesty for you who are worthy of honour, the reason for the delay.”

The aged Sumantra came to the door of the inner apartment and entered, unannounced. Praising the royal dynasty of Raghu, he reached the chamber where the king was lying on the ground. Pouring forth his praise, he approached the arras hanging before the king’s chamber, and said: “O Sovereign, may Surya, Kuvera, Varuna, Agni and Indra grant you victory. The Goddess Night, has departed, dawn has come, arise O Lion among Kings! Brahmins, ambassadors and chiefs of the forces have assembled and are desirous of seeing you.”

The king, rousing himself, said to his chief minister, Sumantra: “Bring Shri Ramacandra hither speedily. Why dost you delay? I do not sleep, go bring Shri Rama with all haste.” Sumantra, bowing to the king, went forth to execute his commands. Thinking the installation of Rama to be near, he set out for the palace, passing joyfully along the royal route gay with flags and banners. Hearing on all sides, people conversing of the coming event, he mingled with the happy throng and after walking some distance, saw Shri Rama’s palace, white as the peak of Mount Kailasha and fair as Indra’s abode.

The turrets, adorned with golden images, studded with coral and jewels, rendered the palace resplendent, like the winter clouds on the caverns of Mount Sumeru. The main gateway, decorated with wreaths of gems and pearls, was fragrant with sandalwood and ambergris, sweet-scented like the Malaygiri mountain and abounding with cranes and peacocks. The doors and walls of the inner apartments were decorated with paintings of lions, tigers and wolves, pleasing to the eye and mind.

The palace of Rama, resplendent as the sun and moon, furnished like the palace of Kuvera and equalling the abode of Indra, was surrounded by many kinds of birds who sported there. Men from distant lands in bejewelled apparel waited bearing gifts in their hands, eager to behold Rama. The spacious palace was sumptuously furnished and the attendants serving there were men of small stature.

Shri Sumantra, delighting the people, in his chariot drawn by horses, came to the door of the palace which was filled with untold wealth and surrounded by deer and peacocks gladdening the heart.

Entering the gates and greeting those dear to Rama, Sumantra reached the door of the inner apartment. There also he heard everyone conversing of Shri Rama and he rejoiced to hear them speaking of his glory. He beheld the inner inclosure, resplendent and lofty as Mount Meru, which was rendered charming by the presence of many deer and birds. There, too, he beheld those from various lands, descending from their chariots, bearing gifts.

He observed an elephant equal to a hill in height, resembling a dark cloud, who had never known the touch of a goad and whose forehead was dripping with sweat. Its name was Shatrunja, and it stood prepared to carry Rama.

Proceeding further, Sumantra beheld many charioteers and horsemen ready with their caparisoned horses. Continuing on his way, Shri Rama’s chief minister saw countless artists and poets gathered there.

Passing through the multitude, he came to the private apartment of Shri Rama. Unchallenged, the great Sumantra, resembling a cloud, entered the apartment as a crocodile enters the gem-filled ocean.