“O Rama, may happiness attend you! O Lakshmana, I am pleased with you that with Sita you have come hither to pay me homage. Undoubtedly the long journey will have wearied you both, as also Maithili, whose sighs betray it.

“That youthful lady, who is unaccustomed to exertion, has come to the forest out of love for her lord, though the way is beset with difficulties; therefore, O Rama, do that which will give her pleasure.

“Since the beginning of time, O Joy of the House of Raghu, it has been woman’s nature to cling to a man in prosperity and abandon him in adversity. Swift as lightning in thought, sharp as a sword in speech, her moods comparable to an eagle’s flight, such is woman! But your consort is wholly free from these defects, she is worthy of praise and is the foremost of those devoted to their lord; amongst the Gods she is known as a second Arundhati. That region will be renowned where you, Saumitri and this princess have sojourned, O Conqueror of Your Foes.”

Thus did the sage address Raghava, who, with joined palms, in humble accents, answered that ascetic who shone like a flame, saying:—

“I am overwhelmed with favour, since the foremost among ascetics is gratified with me, as also with my brother and my consort who accompany me.

“Do you direct me to a place abounding in trees, and with abundant water, where we can dwell in peace and happiness.”

Hearing Rama’s words, that excellent and magnanimous sage, reflecting an instant, made this judicious reply:—

“My Dear Son, at eight miles distance from here, is a spot known by the name of Pancavati, where roots, fruit and water abound and where there are many deer. Go thither and with Saumitri establish a hermitage, living there happily and carrying out the behests of your sire.

“By the power of my penance and by virtue of the affection I bore for King Dasaratha, I am acquainted with your history, O Irreproachable Prince. Though you have promised to remain with me in these solitudes, yet mine austerities have revealed to me the true desires of thine heart. Therefore I say to you again: ‘Seek out Pancavati!’ It is an enchanting woodland, that will delight Maithili. That place, worthy of all praise, is not far from here, O Raghava, and is close to the Godaveri river; Sita will be happy there. Abounding in roots, fruit and every kind of bird, it is set apart, O Long-armed Hero, and is lovely, delightful and sacred. You of righteous ways, who art ever active and able to defend all beings, will dwell there, O Rama, in order to protect the ascetics.

To the north of the Madhuka woods, which you are able to see from here, O Hero, you will find a grove of fig trees. Scale the mountain ridges, not far distant, and you shalt come upon the renowned Pancavati, lying there with its flowering woods.”

Hearing the words of the Sage Agastya, Rama, accompanied by Saumitri, took leave of that illustrious ascetic, and having circumambulated him, paid homage to his feet and with his permission departed towards the solitudes of Pancavati, accompanied by Sita.

The two princes, invincible in combat, taking up their bows and strapping on their quivers, resolutely followed the path to Pancavati, pointed out by the great sage.