Shri Bharata with his counsellors reverently approached the Ingudi tree and looked with love on the grassy couch. He said to his mothers: “This grass was pressed by the royal frame of the illustrious Ramacandra, who passed the first night of exile in this place. It ill became the great and wise son of King Dasaratha to sleep on the bare earth! How could Shri Rama, who ever reposed on a soft couch, sleep on the naked ground? Shri Rama who dwelt in a seven-storied palace, the floors of which were studded with gold and silver flowers, overlaid with soft carpets of many a hue on which marvellous floral designs were woven, the whole fragrant with the perfume of sandalwood and ambergris, and which resembled the clouds; where the cries of parrots and mainas were constantly heard and cool air flowed uninterruptedly through shafts; where the walls inlaid with gold and silver resembled the Meru mountain: in such a palace, Shri Rama was accustomed to rest, awakened each morning by the sweet music of the royal musicians and the gentle tinkling of women’s anklets, and duly praised by the bards, panegyrists and ministers, in verse and song. To-day, he sleeps on the naked earth and hears the cry of jackals and other wild beasts. This matter is past belief, it resembles a dream! I consider nothing more powerful than the will of the Lord; how otherwise should the son of King Dasaratha be seen sleeping on the earth? How could the daughter of King Janaka, that beautiful princess, the beloved daughter-in-law of King Dasaratha, sleep on the naked ground?

“O Mother, here is my brother’s couch, on it he tossed, crushing the grass by the weight of his limbs. It would seem that Shri Sita rested here also, wearing her ornaments, since I perceive particles of gold lying here and there. O Mother, see Sita’s scarf became entangled here, for in this place I see threads of silk! Whether it be hard or soft, the couch of her lord is sweet to a woman I See! The young and tender Sita, devoted to her husband, experienced no smart, resting here. Oh! I am undone! What a merciless wretch am I! On my account, Shri Ramacandra and his spouse lay on this hard couch! Alas that Shri Rama, deprived of kingly felicity, though born of a royal line, dear to all and the cause of universal joy, whose complexion resembles the blue lotus, whose eyes are slightly red, charming to look upon, not meriting tribulation, should have to sleep on the naked earth.

“Blessed and fortunate is Lakshmana, who followed his brother in the days of adversity 1 Fruitful is the life of Princess Sita who, thus accompanied her lord to the forest. Wretched are we, bereft of Shri Rama; nor are we certain that he will allow us to serve him. King Dasaratha, being dead, and Shri Rama having entered the forest, the earth appears to me like a boat without a pilot. None desires to usurp the place spiritually reserved for him, who dwells in the forest. To-day the capital is empty and unprotected, horses and elephants wander here and there unconfined, there being none to control them; the gates of the city are left open and unguarded; the army is melancholy and indifferent to the defence of the capital! Ayodhya externally without protection and bereft of purpose, is in a sorry state. Even its enemies turn from it, as men turn away from poisoned food!

“From to-day, assuming an ascetic garb, I will sleep on the earth and live on fruit and roots. I shall live in the forest for the remainder of the term which Rama has to discharge, so that his vow may be fulfilled. My brother Shatrughna shall dwell with me in the forest, while Lakshmana returns with Rama to protect the capital! The learned brahmins will install Shri Rama in Ayodhya! I entreat the gods to fulfil the desire of my heart. If Rama, however, will not grant my request, I will remain in the forest as his servant, but how should he reject my appeal? Is he not compassionate towards his devotees?”