At this time, Queen Kaikeyi had a female servant who had accompanied her from the abode of her royal parent and was ever in attendance on the queen. Her name was Manthara.

By chance, ascending the balcony of the palace which resembled the full moon, she perceived ihe capital of Ayodhya adorned with garlands of lotuses and the principal streets sprinkled with water. Flags were fluttering from the tops of the tall houses, the roads levelled, and the wide streets crowded with people. Holy brahmins carrying auspicious gifts were waiting to offer them to Shri Ramacandra; the temples were painted white and strains of musical instruments resounded everywhere. Elated by the festivities, joyful crowds were singing the Vedic mantras and not only men but elephants, horses and cattle demonstrated their joy in their own peculiar fashion. Large flags bound with flowers were being carried by joyous citizens wandering here and there.

Manthara was amazed to see these unusual activities and, meeting Shri Rama’s royal nurse gaily dressed in a white silken robe, she enquired of her, saying: “Why is the wealthy Queen Kaushalya, mother of Shri Rama, distributing immense riches in charity to-day? Why are the people of the capital so joyous? What is the happy king about to accomplish?”

The royal nurse, overcome with joy at that time, told the hunchbacked Manthara of Rama’s enthronement. She said: “To-morrow, at dawn, under the Pushya star, King Dasaratha will install the sinless Rama, the subduer of anger, as Yuvaraja.” The words of the nurse filled the hunchbacked woman with jealous wrath. Speedily descending from the high palace which resembled Mt. Kailasa, that sinful woman, consumed with malice, entered the bedchamber of Queen Kaikeyi and, waking her, thus addressed her:—

“Why art you sleeping, O Deluded One? You are in imminent peril; art you blind to future suffering? O Fair One, the good fortune which you vauntest is about to pass away, like a river that is dried up in the summer season.”

Queen Kaikeyi, pained by the bitter words of the sinful hunchbacked maid, answered her saying: “O Manthara, is all well? Why do I behold you with a gloomy mien, what is the cause of your distress?”

Hearing the gentle accents of Queen Kaikeyi, Manthara, who was full of cunning, assuming a sorrowful mien and feigning friendship for the queen, spoke bitterly, “O Devi, a great calamity has befallen you. Hear me 1 King Dasaratha is about to proclaim Shri Ramacandra as regent. I am immersed in the bottomless sea of fear; I am afflicted with pain and sorrow; I am as if scorched by fire, and for your good I have come hither. O Kaikeyi, your woes are my woes, your sorrows my sorrows, of this I am certain. Hearken! You are the daughter of a great royal House and you are the favourite of King Dasaratha. Why art you deceived by his crafty ways? Outwardly, your husband appears to be a speaker of truth, but, inwardly, he is a deceitful man. His speech is fair, but his heart is hard. Your honesty is the cause of your suffering. Prevailing on you.by specious words, the king visits you and speaks insincere words to you. By delivering the kingdom to Kaushalya’s son, he seeks to make her mistress of all. Like an affectionate mother, you have nourished in your lap the enemy that is called your lord. You resemblest the one who pressed a serpent to her bosom deeming it, through illusion, to be her infant. As a snake or an enemy harms the one who has spared him, so has King Dasaratha to-day dealt with you and your son. This sinful, deceitful monarch will destroy you, your son and your relatives, who are worthy of happiness, by enthroning Shri Ramacandra. O You of Deluded Intellect, ever indifferent to thine own good, hear me, there is yet time. Whatever you can’st do for thine own advantage perform and thus protect your son and me.”

Hearing the words of Manthara, the beautiful queen rose from her couch, like the autumnal moon. Filled with wonder and delight, she took from her person a precious ornament and presented it to the hunchback woman.

That lovely one, unequalled in beauty among youthful women, said to Manthara: “O Manthara, you have brought me joyful tidings. Tell me, what I can offer you in return for these pleasing words? I find no difference between Rama and Bharata. I am, therefore, fully satisfied if the king installs Shri Ramacandra. O Dear One, nothing is more pleasing to me than the news of Shri Rama’s enthronement. Ask for whatever pleases you, and I will confer it on you.”