The night being over and the day having dawned, the citizens awoke and not beholding Rama, were overwhelmed with grief, not knowing how to act. Seeking here and there, their eyes bathed in tears, they were unable to discover by what path Shri Rama had departed. Wretched and pale with distress, with quivering hearts and utterly dispirited, they broke into piteous exclamations, saying:—

“Cursed be the sleep that veiled our perceptions, now we shall not behold the full chested and large-eyed Rama. How fruitless is our devotion, since Rama has gone to the forest leaving us, his faithful friends, here. Why has Rama who ever treated us as his children, left us to enter the forest? Either we will find death here or go to the Himalayas and perish in the snow. What avails life without Rama? Here is dried wood, let us collect it and kindling a fire, perish in the flames. What shall we say on our return? Shall we tell others we have abandoned the mighty armed Rama, who is free from envy and a votary of truth? Alas 1 we cannot do so. The wretched city with the women, the aged and the children, seeing us return without Rama, will be plunged in grief. Having abandoned our homes to follow that self-controlled prince, how can we venture to face the people without him?”

Thus lamenting, with uplifted arms, filled with distress, they resembled cows bereft of their young. ( Following the track of the chariot wheels, they pressed forward, till, losing their trace, they became prostrate with grief. Finding no further path to follow, they turned back crying: “Alas! what shall we do? Fate is against us!” Then, by the way by which they had come, they retraced their steps to Ayodhya.

Shri Rama, failing to return, the people became restless, and seeing the capital cheerless, despondent and sorrow-stricken, they wept, murmuring to each other: “The city, bereft of Rama, has no beauty, it resembles a dried-up river, divested of its snakes by an eagle.” As the sky without the moon or the sea without water, so did the city appear to the people, causing their hearts to faint within them.

Sadly entering their magnificent dwellings, afflicted and distraught, they were unable to distinguish one of their own relatives from a stranger.