As the mighty warriors fell, pierced by the weapons of Vishvamitra’s forces, Shri Vasishtha said to Shabala: “O Shabala, create more warriors by the power of Yoga.”

Shabala, lowing loudly, produced well-armed soldiers from her feet and udders, and from her hair and thighs were born the extraordinary warriors Harita and Kirata. By these, the whole army of Vishvamitra consisting of elephants, horses and chariots, was instantly destroyed. Beholding their entire army exterminated by the power of Shri Vasishtha, King Vishvami-tra’s hundred sons bearing mighty arms and with various thought-propelled weapons rushed angrily at the holy Sage Vasishtha. Shri Vasishtha merely uttered the sound “H’m!” and they were all immediately consumed. By the great Sage Vasishtha, the infantry, cavalry and chariots, together with the sons of King Vishvamitra, were instantly burned to ashes.

Then the illustrious monarch Vishvamitra whose sons and army had been annihilated, was filled with shame and dismay. Deprived of his glory, he resembled a waveless ocean or a snake bereft of its fangs or the sun under eclipse. Like a bird without wings, his confidence shattered, his pride humbled, he became filled with anxiety. Bestowing the kingdom on his only remaining son, he exhorted him to rule according to dharma and then himself retired to the forest to practise asceticism.

After some time, he found favour with Shri Mahadeva the magnanimous granter of boons, and he, appearing before Vishvamitra, addressed him saying: “O King, why art you undergoing penance? What is your desire? I will grant you whatsoever you asks?”

Shri Vishvamitra making obeisance to Shri Mahadeva said to him: “O Great God, if I have found favour with you, then instruct me in the Upanishads and other branches of learning, teach me also the mysteries and the science of archery. Whatever weapons are known to the danavas, yakshas, asuras and other beings, let them be revealed to me by your grace.”

On hearing the request of the king, Shri Shiva answered, “Be it so” and returned to his abode.

King Vishvamitra, having acquired the various weapons from Mahadeva, became as happy as the sea at the time of the full moon. He now resolved to subdue the Sage Vasishtha and regarded him as his captive already.

Proceeding to his hermitage he discharged his great weapons like rain, setting the forest of Tapovan ablaze. Afflicted by these dreadful weapons, all the sages began to flee to the four quarters in terror; even the disciples of Shri Vasishtha, together with innumerable birds and beasts, escaped hastily in every direction. The hermitage of Shri Vasishtha became deserted and a deep silence fell upon it, causing it to resemble a barren field.

Shri Vasishtha repeatedly called out: “Fear not, fear not, I will destroy Vishvamitra as the sun dispels the morning mist.”

Then the great Sage Vasishtha, foremost among those who practise silent prayer, angrily addressed Vishvamitra saying: “You have destroyed my ancient and auspicious hermitage, O Wicked and Deluded Wretch, you thyself shaft be destroyed.”

Snatching up his staff equal to the rod of Yama, he advanced like a naked flame.