Hearing these words, Shri Rama having regard for the presence of his sire, answered with restraint, saying: “O Parasurama, your deeds are known to me, as also the avenging of your fathers’ murderers. Methinks you dost deem me lacking in valour, I, a kshatriya, and a descendant of the Solar race. O Rishi, witness my prowess.”

Having spoken thus, Shri Ramacandra, incensed, seized the bow and arrows from the rishi’s hands and stringing it, placed an arrow on it. While drawing the mighty bow, the son of Dasaratha addressed the rishi with defiance, saying: “O Sage, you are a brahmin and as such do I honour you; you are further a kinsman of Shri Vishvamitra, therefore I shall not slay you with this arrow, but by this shaft I will rob you of the power of motion so that you shall no longer be able to travel through space, or I will banish you from those high regions to which you have attained by the practice of penance. Say, what is your desire? This divine arrow of Vishnu, possessing the power of vanquishing the strength and pride of the foe, may not be restored by me to the quiver, till it has accomplished its great purpose.”

When Rama placed the arrow in the sacred bow, Brahma, with the gods, assembled to behold that glorious deed, followed by the gandharvas, apsaras, yakshas and other beings. Shri Ramacandra, having taken up the mighty bow, the three worlds began to tremble and Parasurama, bereft of his divine power, stood aghast. Deprived of his glory and powerless, Shri Parasurama with humble entreaty, addressed the lotus-eyed Rama:—

“When the dominion of the earth was given by me to the sage Kashyapa, he said ‘You must not inhabit this kingdom Therefore, O Rama, in obedience to the sage, I do not stay on the earth by night. This world is no longer mine, but belongs to Kashyapa. O Rama, do not deprive me of the power of movement, but allow me speedily to return to the beautiful Mahendra mountain. You can’st deprive me of the merits earned by the practice of Yoga. I know You to be the Imperishable, You are verily Vishnu Himself, none but You could’st wield this bow. O Son of Raghu, the gods have assembled to behold You; You are pre-eminent in combat, and the conqueror of Thine enemies. O Virtuous Prince, to be defeated by You is no ignominy; discharge Your matchless arrow and I will return to the Mahendra mountain.”

Thereupon Shri Ramacandra discharged the arrow and the merit of Parasurama was rendered void, whereupon he speedily departed to the Mahendra mountain.

The darkness being dispelled and the whole world once more filled with light, Rama was worshipped by the gods and rishis, and Shri Parasurama having circumambulated the son of Dasaratha, returned to his own hermitage.