On the night the messengers reached the city, Prince Bharata had a most inauspicious dream. Seeing that evil dream, the son of the emperor, when the night ended, was much distressed. His intimate friends, the companions of his own age, seeing him in distress, spoke pleasing words in the assembly and related humorous traditions to distract his mind. Some played on vinas for his entertainment, others danced, acted and narrated stories.

Despite the endeavours of his amiable companions, Prince Bharata remained melancholy. At length, they addressed him, saying: “O Friend, we have tried in vain to entertain you, why dost you not smile?”

Bharata replied: “Hear the cause of my sadness. In a dream, I saw my father in faded apparel, his hair dishevelled, falling from a mountain peak into a pit of cow dung. There, I saw that great king, wallowing like a frog and drinking oil from the palms of his hands; afterwards, I beheld him eating rice mixed with sesamum seed, his body besmeared with oil, he being immersed in it. Again, in that dream, I saw the sea dry up and the moon fall on the earth and the world plunged in darkness. The tusks of the royal elephants were broken in pieces and a blazing fire was suddenly extinguished. I saw the earth rent and the leaves of the trees wither and the mountains riven and emit smoke. I beheld the king on an iron seat, clad in black and women attired in black and yellow mocking him. That virtuous king, adorned with sandalwood paste, wearing garlands of red flowers, seated in a chariot drawn by asses went southwards. I saw a female demon of monstrous shape clothed in red deriding the king. This fearful vision has been seen by me. Either myself or Rama or the king or Lakshmana will surely die. When, in a dream, one is seen riding in a chariot drawn by asses, the smoke of his funeral pyre will soon ascend. On this account, I am distraught, nought gives me joy, my throat is choked and my mind confused. I see no reason for fear, yet I am apprehensive. I cannot speak or breathe, my body has lost its power, I am agitated and cannot control my distress. Never have I seen so threatening a dream! Reflecting on it, I am perturbed, fear has taken possession of my heart and I know not if I shall ever again behold the king.”