Hearing the words of Rama and beholding him in the guise of an ascetic, the king lost consciousness and his consorts turned away in distress. Overcome with grief, the wretched monarch could neither look on Rama nor utter a word to him and for a space remained insensible. Then, regaining consciousness, the long-armed king, remembering Rama, began to lament: “Now, without doubt, I know that in some previous birth, I separated many calves from their mothers and deprived many beings of their lives, on account of which all this has befallen me. The vital airs do not leave the body before the appointed time; though tormented by Kaikeyi, yet death does not claim me. Alas! I behold Shri Ramacandra, resplendent as fire, divested of his royal robes and attired in ascetic’s garb. This evil caused by Kaikeyi, through guile and the desire for personal advantage is the source of universal distress.”

The king’s eyes were suffused with tears and crying: “Rama, Rama,” his throat choked, and he could utter no more. After some time, still shedding tears, he addressed Sumantra, saying: “Yoke the best steeds to the chariot and convey Shri Rama out of the city. Now it is made clear that a man’s virtue leads him into affliction, since so wise and valiant a son is being banished by his parents.”

As instructed by the king, Sumantra yoked the most excellent of steeds to a richly decorated chariot and bringing the golden car with the best steeds yoked thereto, before the prince, said humbly: “The chariot is at hand.”

The king then summoned his upright and trustworthy treasurer and spoke to him in words suitable to the place and time: “Bring hither for Janaki, costly apparel and ornaments to serve the princess for fourteen years.” As instructed by the king, the master of the treasury brought the various articles and delivered them to Princess Sita. The highly born Sita, attiring herself in a sumptuous robe and ornaments, made ready to depart for the forest. Thus attired, Shri Janaki illumined the palace as the rays of the rising sun illumine the sky.

Queen Kaushalya embraced the princess of virtuous conduct to her bosom and blessing her said: “The world is filled with undutiful wives, who cease to regard their lord when he has fallen into distress. Such is the nature of those who having enjoyed great pleasures, on finding their consort involved in trouble, condemn and sometimes even abandon him. Many are the women, untruthful, heartless, unchaste, devious and vain, full of evil passions, the destroyers of long-honoured ties. Neither a worthy family nor duty, nor the instruction of the Guru, nor gifts, sway them, nor do they honour the marriage ties, their minds being fickle. But those women devoted to their husbands, of virtuous conduct, honouring the tradition of their family, truthful, following the instructions of their preceptor, regard their lord as the chief of men. Therefore, do not condemn my son, now ready to enter the forest, who should be regarded by you rather as a deity, whether in poverty or prosperity.”

Shri Sita, understanding the import of these words, inspired by dharma, humbly replied: O Noble Lady, I will fulfil your commands. It is known to me that a woman should serve her lord, and my parents have instructed me in the matter. Do not deem me a false woman. I am as unable to forsake the path of virtue as the sun’s light the moon. As a lute is useless without strings, as a chariot cannot move without wheels, so is a wife bereft of her husband, even if she have a hundred sons.

“Father, mother or son can give but a small measure of happiness, but a husband is the source of limitless joy. What woman is so unworthy that she will not obey her husband? I am acquainted with all the duties of a wife, being instructed by those eminent in virtue. A husband is as a god to his consort, never shall I not honour him.”

The simple-hearted queen, shedding tears of distress on account of the separation from her son, hearing Princess Sita’s words, was comforted.

Then Rama said: “O Mother, when I am in the forest, do not look on my father with a reproachful countenance, the term of my exile will soon be ended. The fourteen years will pass like a dream. Surrounded by my friends, you shalt behold me serving my sire.”

Speaking thus to his mother Kaushalya, Shri Rama reflected how to address the three hundred and fifty other consorts of the king. To these who were bitterly lamenting, he spoke with humility. “While living amongst you, if I have ever, in ignorance, offended you, be gracious enough to pardon me.” These pious and humble words of Rama, inspired by dharma, touched the hearts of the queens, causing them to shed tears and their lamentations resembled the sound of krouncha birds.

The palace of the king, formerly resounding to the beating of drums resembling the crash of thunder, was to-day filled with the wailing of the sorrow-stricken queens.