When Khara of great prowess advanced on Rama’s hermitage, the two princes observed many dreadful portents, and Rama, deeply moved, said to Lakshmana:—“O Mighty-armed One, these inauspicious omens, causing terror to all beings, foretell the destraction of the demon hosts.

“Yonder dun-coloured clouds, resembling asses’ skin, pass across the sky, raining blood in dreadful convulsions. Behold, O Lakshmana, smoke rising from mine arrows, as if they rejoiced at the coming contest, and my bow of beaten gold moving of itself, eager for action. Meseems the cry of wild birds that frequent the woods foretells danger, nay, that the very lives of our foes are in jeopardy. Assuredly a great battle will shortly take place; the twitching of my left arm betokens it. O Hero, for us victory is imminent, and the defeat of the titans assured. Your countenance is resplendent and exultant, O Lakshmana! Those warriors who enter into combat with a rueful mien are lost.

“I hear the roar of those titans of cruel deeds and the sound of their drums. If a prudent man desires success and wishes to escape defeat, he should be forearmed against the future. Therefore, bearing your bow and arrows, taking Sita with you, repair to a mountain cave, screened by trees and difficult of access. O Lakshmana, do not oppose my commands, but, swearing obedience to my feet, go thither, O Friend, without delay. You are valiant and well able to strike down the titans, but I desire to slay these Prowlers of the Night single-handed.”

Having spoken thus, Lakshmana, taking up his bow and arrows, withdrew with Sita to an inaccessible cave.

As Lakshmana entered the cavern with Sita, Rama rejoiced at his brother’s submission and donned his coat of mail.

Clothed in armour that shone like fire, Rama resembled a mighty flame illumining the darkness, and that hero, standing erect, took up his bow and arrows and, by the twanging of the cord, caused the four cardinal points to re-echo.

Then the Gods, Gandharvas, Siddhas and Caranas gathered together to witness the struggle and the great-souled Rishis began to converse one with the other, saying:—

“May it be well with all the cows and brahmins found on the earth! May Raghava overcome the descendants of Paulastya in combat! May he be as victorious as Vishnu, who with his discus routed the foremost of the asuras 1”

Having spoken thus, exchanging glances, they added:—“But how can Rama overcome those fourteen thousand demons of fearful deeds single-handed?”

Thereafter those Rajarishis and Siddhas, stationed in their aerial chariots, were moved with curiosity as to the outcome of the conflict and seeing Rama, splendidly accoutred, standing alone on the field of battle, all those beings were filled with apprehension; the peerless Rama, however, the doer of noble deeds, assumed the aspect of that high-souled and avenging God, Rudra!

Whilst the Gods, Gandharvas and Caranas were still conversing, the army of the titans, creating a fearful clamour, dad in mail, bearing weapons and banners, appeared on every side.

Uttering loud battle cries, jostling one another, twanging their bowstrings, opening their jaws wide, they shouted:—“We will destroy the enemy I” This appalling tumult filled the forest and struck terror into the hearts of its denizens, who fled from the sound, not daring to look back.

Then the demon army, resembling a stormy sea, brandishing every kind of weapon, rapidly approached Rama, but he, an experienced warrior, looking round on every side, saw that army of Khara’s advancing and went out to meet it, taking his arrows from their quiver and stretching his dread bow, letting forth a piercing shout presaging the death of the titans.

Dreadful to behold in his wrath, he resembled the fire at the dissolution of the world and seeing him filled with energy the forest deities fled away. In his anger, Rama resembled the Bearer of the Pinaka bow intent on destroying Daksha’s sacrifice.

With their bows and weapons, their cars and their armour, which shone like fire, the hosts of those eaters of human flesh resembled a mass of dark clouds at the hour of sunrise.