The Delighter of the World, Shri Rama, sitting beneath a tree performed his evening devotion (Sandhya) and then addressed Shri Lakshmana thus: “O Brother, this is our first night in the forest without Sumantra, do not be dispirited. From now on at night but one of us shall sleep, since the protection of Shri Sita is our care. O Lakshmana, gathering leaves and grass, let us prepare a bed and lay ourselves down.”

Shri Rama, accustomed to a sumptuous and princely couch, lay that night on the bare earth. Conversing with Shri Lakshmana, he said: “O Lakshmana, it may be that King Dasaratha slept fitfully this day, but Kaikeyi having realised her ambition, is surely satisfied. I fear that she, avid for the kingdom, will slay the king’ere Bharata returns. The aged monarch is defenceless, a slave to Kaikeyi and subject to desire; bereft of me, how will the wretched king safeguard himself? Viewing the king’s downfall and his subjection in matters of desire, it would seem that concupiscence is more powerful than wealth or virtue. O Brother, what foolish man, swayed by a woman, would abandon an obedient son like me? Bharata alone is fortunate, who, with his consort, having acquired Ayodhya, will enjoy the kingdom.

“Prince Bharata will become the ruler of the whole empire since the life of the king is drawing to its close and I have entered the forest. He who gives up righteousness and disregarding prosperity, seeks to gratify his desires, like King Dasaratha, falls a prey to sorrow. O Handsome Prince, I deem that Kaikeyi entered our house to destroy the king, to send me into exile and to install Bharata as ruler of the kingdom. O Brother, I fear that Kaikeyi, blinded by power, may persecute Kaushalya and Sumitra, they being our mothers. Do you, lest Kaushalya and Sumitra suffer, go to Ayodhya, for my sake. I, with Sita, will enter the Dandaka forest. Go you to Ayodhya and become the protector of the defenceless Queen Kaushalya. The evilly-disposed Kaikeyi, through enmity to us, may cause injury to our mothers. O Lakshmana, assuredly in some previous birth, my mother has deprived other women of their sons and is reaping the fruit of that action in this life. Woe unto me, that I should have to abandon my mother who nurtured me with exceeding love and should now enjoy felicity. O Lakshmana, may no woman give birth to a son like me, who am the source of infinite distress to my mother. O Brother, a maina taught by me, cried in the hearing of my mother, ‘Bite the enemy’s foot while you are in his mouth’. O Lakshmana, my unfortunate mother is to-day sunk in an ocean of grief and I am not able to succour her. Better it were that she had had no son! Assuredly she is an object of compassion, mourning in my separation. Alas 1 what extremity of grief is hers to-day! O Lakshmana, should I give way to wrath, I were able to subdue the world not to speak of Ayodhya, but for the upholding of righteousness, I may not demonstrate my power. Should I do so, I should incur sin and endanger the life hereafter; never will I take the kingdom by force.”

Thus lamenting in the lonely forest, Rama, abandoning restraint, passed the night in tears.

When, ceasing to lament, Lakshmana beheld Rama like an extinguished fire or a calm sea, he thus addressed him: “O Great Hero, deprived of you, Ayodhya is without splendour, as the night, at the setting of the sun, but, O Rama, it is unworthy of you to grieve, sapping the courage of Sita and myself. Like fish without water, we cannot live an instant without you. O Great One, I do not desire to see my father, my brother Shatrughna or my mother Sumitra, nor even heaven itself.”

Hearing the words of Lakshmana, full of good counsel, Shri Ramacandra arose and seated himself by Sita on the bed of leaves. Determined to follow his destiny, Shri Rama entered upon the period of exile. From that day, the two great princes of the house of Raghu dwelt in the lonely forest, serene and fearless like two lions dwelling on the summit of a mountain.