Then the lovely Sita, of flawless limbs and skin of a pure golden hue, gathering flowers, beheld that ravishing fawn with gold and silver flanks, and highly delighted called to her Lord and Lakshmana, who were furnished with weapons, saying:—“O Prince, do you come quickly with your younger brother!” Thus she cried again and again, while continuing to watch the deer, and at her call those two lions among men, Rama and Lakshmana turned their eyes in that direction and beheld the fawn.

Astounded, Lakshmana exclaimed:—“Undoubtedly the titan Marica has assumed the form of a deer. Kings who hunt in the forest, lured by this deceptive shape, are slain by him and, O Rama, this brilliant fawn, whose radiance rivals the sun, is the device of a magician; such a deer does not exist on earth, O Master of the World, it is an illusion, born of cunning.”

As Lakshmana was speaking thus, Sita with a delighted smile interrupted him and being wholly captivated by this phantom, said:—

“O Son of a King, this marvellous fawn has taken possession of my heart; take it captive, O Great Warrior, it will serve as a plaything. Many beautiful creatures, lovely to look upon, range the forest in the vicinity of our hermitage, such as Camaras, Srimaras and Rikshas, while troops of Prishatas, Vanaras and Kinneras disport themselves here, but O Long-armed Heroes full of grace and strength, I have never seen a wild creature whose brilliance and gentle nimble ways are equal to this wonderful fawn’s. With its slender many-coloured body encrusted with gems, it illumines the whole forest around me with a lustre resembling the moon’s. What beauty! What resplendence! What grace! What radiance! This marvellous fawn with its graceful limbs possesses me utterly. If you are able to capture it alive, it will prove an object of supreme wonder in the hermitage and when our exile is over it will be an ornament to the palace of the queens.

“O Lord! Prince Bharata and my mothers, seeing this celestially beautiful deer, will be struck with amazement. If you are not able to capture this wonderful fawn alive, its skin will be most precious, O Lion among Men. I shall delight to sit on its golden hide, strewn with kusha grass. I crave pardon if this cruel wish may seem unworthy of a woman, but the beauty of the deer excites my admiration!”

This graceful creature with its golden skin, its horns set with precious gems, shining like the rising sun or the Milky Way, captivated Rama himself, who, hearing Sita’s words, yielded to her wish and gaily addressed Lakshmana, saying:—

“O Lakshmana, mark how this deer has excited Vaidehi’s desire. On account of its supreme beauty this fawn will lose its life to-day. Neither in the forest, nor in the region of Nandana, nor in the solitude of Caitaratha, nor anywhere on earth does such a fawn exist.

“See how, whichever way its velvety striped skin is brushed, it glistens. When it opens its mouth, its tongue shoots forth like a bright flame in a lit brazier or lightning from a cloud. With its head of emerald and crystal, its belly shining like mother of pearl, whose heart would it not steal away with its indescribable beauty? Who, on beholding this divine apparition, shining like gold, covered with every kind of gem, would not be charmed?

“It is for food and sport that kings, bearing their bows, hunt wild beasts in the forest, and many treasures of different kinds are found there by chance, such as pearls, diamonds and gold, increasing man’s possessions, surpassing the imagination of Indra, and, O Lakshmana, this is the wealth spoken of by those who are versed in the Artha-Shastra.

“The slender-waisted Vaidehi will sit with me on the fleece of that marvellous deer; neither the skin of Kadali, Priyaka, Prabeni or Abiki compares in texture to that of this deer. Truly exquisite, this gazelle and its counterpart in the heavens are both divine, the one amongst the stars and the other on earth, yet if you are certain that this is an illusion created by the titan, O Lakshmana, I will destroy it. That cruel and evil-souled Marica slew many great ascetics ranging in the forest; innumerable kings, armed with bows, hunting here, have fallen under his assaults when he assumed the shape of an illusive deer; let us therefore end his life.

“Formerly Vatapi oppressed the Sages here also, and, entering their stomachs, emerged, riving them, as the embryo of a mule may cause the death of its mother.

One day that demon encountered the great Sage Agastya, gifted with divine powers and was devoured by him when presented in the form of an offering by his brother Ilvali; when the repast was concluded that titan called out ‘Vatapi come forth’ but the excellent Rishi, addressing Ilvali with a smile, said:—

“‘Since being blinded by your power, many illustrious sages have fallen victim to you on this earth; your brother is now wholly consumed by me.’

“O Lakshmana, this titan will also be annihilated like Vatapi for having set me at nought, who am fixed in my duty and master of my senses. He shall meet his end, as did Vatapi who defied Agastya. Do you remain here without absenting thyself and guard Sita with care. It is our first duty, O Delight of the House of Raghu! I shall either slay that deer or bring it back alive; till I return with the deer, which I shall do without delay, do you remain here with Sita, O Son of Sumitra. She shall have the fawn; its skin will cost it its life this day. Now keep watch over Sita in the hermitage. Till with a single arrow I have brought down this dappled fawn and slain it, do you stay here, O Lakshmana, with the mighty raven, Jatayu, who is strong and wise and ever engaged in pious acts, and protect Maithili in every way.”