Then the illustrious Rama addressed Khara, who was standing mace in hand, bereft of his chariot, and in severe accents, said:—“O Hero, with the support of this army of elephants, horses, chariots and men, you have adopted a course of action condemned by all. He who inflicts pain on others by oppressing them, who is ruthless and engaged in evil deeds, will never know happiness, even though he be Lord of the Three Worlds.

“O Ranger of the Night, one who, like a tyrant, works against the interests of others and resembles a vicious and marauding snake, is ultimately destroyed! He who, overcome by avarice or envy, pursues an evil course, without reflecting on the consequences, forfeits his life and comes to a miserable end, like a brahmany duck that feeds on hailstones.

“O Titan, how canst you evade the consequences of the murder of those ascetics dwelling in the Dandaka Forest, enhancing their merit by the practice of virtue?

“Even if they attain to sovereignty, the wicked, engaged in cruel deeds, condemned by all men, do not enjoy it long, but fall like trees whose roots have been severed.

“O Dweller in the Darkness, as in its proper season the tree puts forth its flowers, so in the course of time evil actions produce bitter fruit.

“As a man who swallows poison soon succumbs, so does the sinner swiftly reap the fruits of his evil actions. It is to put down the instigators of evil, the oppressors of others, that I, under the orders of the King, have come hither. To-day my shining arrows shall penetrate your flesh, as serpents enter an ant-heap, and you shalt follow in the wake of those virtuous ascetics inhabiting the forest, whom you have slain without provocation. Soon those excellent sages, formerly slain by you, shall in their aerial chariots return to behold you lying in hell laid low by mine arrows. O Worst of Men, O You who art of an odious race, defend thyself as you will, I shall presently cut off thine head like the fruit of a palm tree.”

Hearing Rama’s words, Khara, his eyes inflamed with anger, beside himself with rage, answered mockingly:—“O Son of Dasaratha, you are but a common man; yet, having slain these insignificant titans in battle, you dost extol thyself without reason. Those who are brave and valiant never boast of their prowess; only the scum of the warrior caste praise themselves as you have done. Where is the warrior who, on the battlefield, his death imminent, would hymn his own praise? You have revealed your worthlessness by this self-glorification, as brass wearing the semblance of gold reveals its true value in a fire of kusha grass.

“O Rama, armed with a mace, I stand immoveable on the field, like a mountain enriched by precious metals. Behold me with my mace, like unto Antaka himself, armed with his noose, about to end your life; I shall destroy not only you, but the Three Worlds! I could utter more, but refrain, lest our combat be intercepted as the hour of sunset is near. Fourteen thousand titans have fallen under your blows; by slaying you to-day I shall wipe away the tears of their relatives.”

Speaking thus, Khara, filled with fury, hurled his marvellous gold-encircled mace at Rama. Leaving the hand of Khara, that massive and effulgent mace, resembling a blazing thunderbolt, consuming the trees and bushes to ashes, drew near to Rama, but he, as it was about to fall like the noose of death, shattered it to fragments with his arrows while yet in the air.

Crushed and broken, it fell to earth like a serpent stricken by the efficacy of herbs and the power of incantations.