Restraining her grief, sipping a few drops of pure water from her hand, Queen Kaushalya, purifying herself, performed the benedictory rites for the well-being of Rama. She said: “O Prince of the House of Raghu, I may not restrain you, therefore now depart, and on your return, tread the path of the virtuous. O Great Raghu, may that dharma which you have practised with courage, preserve you. May the gods you have worshipped in the temples and on the highways and the great sages protect you. May the weapons given you by the wise Vishvamitra protect you. O Mighty One, preserved by this service rendered by you to your father, mother and the truth, mayest you live long. May the sacrificial kusha grass, sacred grass rings, altars, temples, sacred places, mountains, trees of every kind, lakes, rivers, birds, snakes and lions ever protect you 1 May Brahma, Pusha, Aryama, Indra and Lokapala all be auspicious to you! May the seasons, the months, the weeks, the years, the day and night favour you! O My Son, may holy meditation, concentration and dharma, together with the injunctions, ordained in the Veda protect you! May the Lord Sanat-Kumara, Mahadeva with Uma, Brihaspati, the seven holy Rishis and Shri Narada bless you! May all the perfect beings adored by me, ever protect you! May the mountain ranges, the seas as also Varuna their lord, space, the earth, the rivers and the stars with their deities, the planets and the day and night protect you in the forest! May the six seasons, the twelve months, the whole year and the divisions of the hour promote your happiness! May the devas, the adhityas and the asuras, wandering in the forest in the guise of hermits, protect you!

“May no rakshasas, pisachas, those who practise cruelty, that which is ill-omened and the eaters of flesh, ever cause you injury! May no monkeys, scorpions, gadflies, serpents or reptiles approach you! O My Son, may no elephant, lion, tiger, bear or beast with awful jaws, or buffaloes and those with dangerous horns, be hostile to you; propitiated by me, may they not cause you injury in the forestMay your way be blessed, may thine undertaking be crowned with success! O My Son, mayest you ever find fruits, roots and the means of subsistence! Mayest you ever tread the forest unhindered 1 May all things between heaven and earth protect you at all times! May Indra, the Moon, the Sun, Kuvera and Yama worshipped by you, protect you from your foes! May Agni, Vayu, Dhuma, and the sacred formulas, taught by the Rishis, protect you when inadvertently contacting the untouchables! May the Lord of the world, Brahma, Vishnu and the gods not mentioned by me, protect you in the forest!”

Then the illustrious Kaushalya worshipped the gods with flowers and sandalwood, offering oblations and kindling the sacred fire for the health and peace of Shri Ramacandra with the aid of the pious brahmins, learned in rituals. With butter, white flowers, sacrificial fuel and mustard seed prepared for the oblation by Queen Kaushalya, the learned and pious brahmins performed the Hawan ceremony for the welfare of Rama.

Then the mother of Rama asked the brahmins to pronounce the benediction and present the oblations to the Lokopalas, the priests receiving the remainder. With honey, curds, rice and clarified butter, the brahmins pronounced their blessings and the queen having offered them abundant alms and whatsoever they desired, addressed Rama, saying: “O Rama, may the same blessing bestowed on Indra on the destruction of Bratrasura be thine. May the blessing bestowed on Garuda when conveying away the amrita, be thine, by the power of my worship of Vinata. May the blessing attendant on Indra, the bearer of the mace, at the time of the raising of the amrita from the ocean at the instance of his mother, Aditi, be thine. O My Son, may the good fortune attendant on the blessed Trivikrama when measuring the world in three strides, be thine also. O Rama, may the seasons, the ocean, the islands, the Vedas and the cardinal points contribute to your happiness.”

Thus, scattering rice over the head of her son, the large-eyed Queen Kaushalya, applying sandal paste to his forehead, bestowed on Rama the healing wood ‘Vishalya Karina’. For his protection, the queen silently repeated the mantrams, and though her heart was filled with distress, appeared as one content. Embracing her son, and kissing his head, she said: “O My Son, now go in peace. Mayest you, having fulfilled the commands of the king, return in health to Ayodhya. O Child, my joy will be complete, when I behold you at your coronation. My troubles ended and my ambitions fulfilled, on your return from exile, beholding you occupying the throne, I shall know supreme happiness. Having fulfilled the injunctions of your father, you will return, and I, beholding you clad in royal apparel with innumerable gems, shall then find peace. O Prince, now depart and accomplish the desire of Princess Sita and me.”

The queen reciting the Peace Chant, her eyes suffused with tears, embracing her son again and again, circumambulated him, gazing on his face.

Touching her feet repeatedly, the illustrious Ramacandra, resplendent in the light of the perfection of Self, left for the palace of Princess Sita.