The day dawned peacefully and King Janaka, having performed his morning devotions, called for the two princes and Vishvamitra. Having honoured the sage and the two descendants of the House of Raghu, he said: “O Blessed Lord, peace be with you, what service can I render you, I am wholly thine.”

Thus addressed by the king, the Sage replied: “These two princes are the sons of King Dasaratha, they are renowned in the warrior caste and exalted throughout the earth. They desire to see the great bow, which is deposited with you, be gracious enough to permit them to view it and having thus accomplished their purpose, they will return to their own capital.”

Thus addressed, King Janaka replied to the sage: “O Holy Rishi, hear from me for what reason this bow is deposited with me. There was a king named Devarata in the sixth generation of the monarch Nimi who obtained this bow as a trust. In ancient days, Shri Mahadeva at the destruction of Daksha’s sacrifice, lifting up his bow in sport said to the gods: ‘O Devas, you have failed to give me my share in the sacrifice, therefore, by means of this bow I shall destroy you all.’

“O Great Sage, the devas overwhelmed with fear, making supplication to the god, succeeded in propitiating Shri Mahadeva. Then he delivered the bow to the gods and they bestowed it on King Devarata. This is the bow.

“Thereafter, while I was ploughing the earth for a sacrifice, a virgin issued therefrom. Being uncovered by the edge of the plough, I named her Sita and she became my daughter. This earth-born virgin has grown up under my protection. For the marriage of my daughter, it was established by me and made known to the kings coming to seek her hand, that I should not bestow her on any prince whose strength had not been fully tried. O Renowned Sage, these kings have come to test their prowess and I have placed the bow before them and requested them to string it, but none as yet has been able to do so. Perceiving them to be deficient in strength, I have refused to bestow my daughter on any of them. These kings, inflamed with anger, considering their failure to string the bow had brought them into disrepute, surrounded my capital, and inflicted great hardship on my people. This siege endured a full year and immeasurably reduced my treasury. Undergoing severe penances, I propitiated the gods, who granted me a large army with which I have defeated those kings who have retreated, bereft of courage, yet still smarting under imagined injury.

“O Great Sage, this is that bow and I will show it to these two princes. O Rishi, should Shri Ramacandra be able to string the bow, I will give my daughter Sita to him in marriage.”