O Rama, when Vishvamitra saw the sages departing, he said to the dwellers of the Tapovana forest: “In the southern region, great obstructions have hindered my penances, I shall therefore go to another quarter to perform austerity. To the west of this place, at the sacred spot named Pushkara, there is a large and beautiful forest where I shall continue my practices undisturbed.”

Reaching that place, the great sage engaging in occult practices, subsisted on fruit and roots.

Meanwhile, King Ambarisha of Ayodhya inaugurated the horse sacrifice, but the horse was carried away by Indra, on which the priest addressed the monarch, saying: “O King, it is for you to protect the sacrificial steed, the horse has been stolen away owing to your negligence, therefore, provide another or seek a human victim, so that the sacrifice may be accomplished without further hindrance.”

Hearing these words, the renowned monarch offered thousands of cows to whosoever should find either a horse, or human being. Seeking the sacrificial beast, the illustrious sovereign passed through many countries, cities and forests, and entered hermitages and sacred places.

At length, the King Ambarisha beheld Richika the Sage, with his sons and wife dwelling on the mountain Bhrigutunga. Making obeisance to him, the king honoured him in various ways and enquired as to his welfare. He then said to him: “If it be agreeable to you, grant me one of your sons in exchange for a hundred thousand cows. After searching many countries, I have not found either a horse or a human victim for the sacrifice. O Lord, do you, therefore, deliver your son to me and accede to my request.”

Richika answered: “O King, I will never bestow my eldest son on any.” His wife then said: “My Lord does not wish to part with the eldest son, but the youngest son Shunaka is dearest to me, I shall not part with him. O Great Muni, the eldest son is beloved of his father and the youngest is dear to his mother, therefore, these two should not be taken away.”

O Rama, the middle son, whose name was Shunashepha, hearing these words, spoke thus: “My father does not wish to part with his eldest son, nor my mother with her youngest, therefore, take me, O King.”

O Rama, the king gave the Sage Richika a hundred thousand cows in exchange for Shunashepha and, mounting his chariot, started with him on his homeward journey.