Commanded by King Janaka, the messengers in swift chariots, passing three nights on the way, their horses greatly fatigued, arrived at Ayodhya. Entering the gates of the palace, they addressed the sentries, saying:—

“Please inform the king that we have come from King Janaka and desire an audience.”

King Dasaratha being informed, caused the messengers to be brought before him. Entering the royal palace, they beheld the aged king who resembled a god. His benign and gracious presence putting them at their ease, they addressed him in gentle and submissive accents saying: “O Illustrious Sovereign, the Lord of the kingdom of Mithila, the performer of great sacrifices, King Janaka, enquires with affection as to your well-being and also concerning the welfare of your subjects. With the consent of the Sage Vishvamitra he sends you the following good tidings. His daughter who has been wooed by many kings unable to pass the requisite trial of strength, who have thereupon returned home discomfited, has been won by your highly fortunate and princely son. He, in the company of the Sage Vishvamitra, coming hither, broke the sacred bow in the presence of a great assembly, therefore, King Janaka desiring to see his daughter wedded to your son, Shri Ramacandra, sends you the following message: “O Great Sovereign be gracious enough to visit my kingdom with all speed, together with your preceptors, your family and attendants and be united with your sons. Accept the love I bear for you. Do you come hither and witness the nuptials of your children.

“O King, these are the words of King Janaka which we bring to you approved by the Sage Vishvamitra and the priest Shri Shatananda.”

Having uttered these words, the messengers, overawed by the sovereign’s presence, became silent.

On receiving these tidings, King Dasaratha full of joy, said to the holy Sage Vasishtha, Shri Vamadeva and his ministers: “Protected by Shri Vishvamitra, Shri Ramacandra and Prince Lakshmana are now in the city of Mithila. The renowned Janaka has witnessed the prowess of Shri Ramacandra and desires to give his daughter in marriage to him. If this union is looked upon with favour by you, let us start for Mithila immediately, so that we may reach it with all speed.”

The sages and ministers there present, answered: “It is well,” whereupon the king, highly pleased, said: “Let us set out to-morrow.”

King Dasaratha with his counsellors entertained King Janaka’s messengers with great respect, and they passed the night there in comfort.