Sumantra, having heard of the preparations for the sacrifice, obtained a private audience with his sovereign and said: “I have heard of a tradition, formerly related to me by the august brahmins. O King, in ancient days, the blessed Sanatkumara predicted to the holy sages around him that a son would be born to you.

It was prophesied that a son of Kasyapa, named Vibhandaka would have a son called Rishyasringa and that he should dwell in the forest alone with his saintly father, unknown to any other man or woman.

This sage would keep the twofold vow of brahmacarya enjoined by the sages. In this way he would pass a long time worshipping God through the fire-sacrifice and the service of his sire.

In the country named Anga, a famous king named Lomapada, would oppress the people by his evil way of life and thus cause a drought. On account of this, the king would suffer great affliction and summoning the brahmins would say to them: “O Wise Men, acquainted as you are with the customs of the world and also the divine laws, tell me what ritual of purification and repentance I can adopt to expiate my evil deeds, which have brought about this drought.”

Then the brahmins, learned in the Veda, would answer the king thus: “O King, exert thyself by every means to bring the son of the Sage Vibhandaka hither. Having with due reverence conveyed him hither, do you confer your daughter Shanta on him in marriage.”

The king having listened to their words and reflected on how he should bring that excellent sage to the court, would then request his ministers and priests to approach the sage, but they would declare their unwillingness to undertake the mission, being afraid of the rishi’s power.

In order to avoid the monarch’s displeasure, however, after deliberating on the method by which the sage could be brought to the court, they would make the following proposal: “By the courtesans can the sage be persuaded to come to the king’s court, the rains will then follow and the drought will be at an end. Then will the king join his daughter in marriage to the sage. By pouring oblations into the sacrificial fire the illustrious sage, Rishyasringa, will, by his grace, obtain the desired son for King Dasaratha.”

“Thus spoke the illustrious Sanatkumara, in the midst of the sages, and I have now recounted it to you.”

King Dasaratha was delighted to hear these words, and requested the minister to describe further how King Lomapada brought the sage to his court.