Having passed the night resting in the forest, the illustrious Sage Vishvamitra spoke to Rama smilingly, in sweet accents:—

“O Prince of Great Renown, I am entirely satisfied with you and am happy to give you these weapons by means of which you shalt be able to conquer and subdue all thine enemies, whether devas, asuras or nagas. Accept these divine weapons, O Rama. Here is the great celestial disc and the Dunda weapon, the Disc of Dharma, the Kala weapon, the Disc of Vishnu and the irresistible Weapon of Indra. O Great Prince, here is the Mace and the Spear of Mahendra the Brahma-Shira and the Ishika. O Mighty-armed One, take the Shankara weapon and the two great maces Koumoduki and Lohitamukhi. O Great Prince receive also the mighty Dharmapasha, the Kalapasha and the Varunapasha and two other maces called Shoshka and Ashani; the Pinaka weapon, the Narayana weapon and the fire-emitting weapon Agneya.

“O Rama, take this wind weapon, Vayuvya, and the horseheaded weapon, Hayashira, also the Krauncha weapon. I give you further two powers and the weapons called Kankala, Mushala, Rapala and Kinkini. O Mighty Prince, I confer on you the two supernatural weapons named Vidyadhara and Nandana, useful in fighting the Asuras.

“Take this jewel among swords, which I give to you, O Mighty-armed One, and another supernatural weapon named Gandharva, and here, O Rama, is one very dear to me called Manava. Here are Prashaman, Soura, Prasvaprana, Darpana and that which has the power of drying up, and the paininflicting weapon causing lamentation. I grant you also the strength to bear the Madana-astra presented to me by Kandarpa which creates in man unbearable sexual desire so that he is unable to fight. Here also is the Paisha-astra and the Mohan-astra.

“O! Illustrious Prince, receive also the weapon that produces inertia, and the great Saumana weapon. O Great Prince, here are the Samvartta, Moushalya, Sattyastra and Mayadhara, and take the Tajaprabha by means of which the strength and courage of the foe are withdrawn, and also the Shishira which chills and the Somastra and Twashtra.

“O Rama, now you are all-powerful and knowest the secrets of magic, yet take the Bava, Shitesu and Manava astra also. O Prince, receive the Paramodara-astra, take all these weapons from me.”

Then the great Vishvamitra turned his face to the east and performed the purificatory rites with joy, conferring on Rama the mantrams for employing the weapons and instructing him in the methods unknown even to the gods. AD these weapons did Shri Vishvamitra confer on Rama, and he, repeating the appropriate mantrams, caused their presiding deities to appear before him. Approaching with joined palms, they said: “O Prince of the House of Raghu, we are your servants and wiD obey your behests.”

Shri Rama, having surveyed and blessed them, answered: “Come and serve me when I summon you.”

Thereafter, Shri Ramacandra offering salutations to the venerable Sage Vishvamitra, said: “Let us proceed further, my Lord.”