Observing the great army of Bharata encamped on the river bank, Guha was filled with apprehension, and said to his followers: “My Friends, this great army which is occupying the river banks, is not to be numbered even in imagination. Assuredly Prince Bharata has come here with evil intent, since the flag of his dynasty flies over his tent. Either he is come to bind and destroy me, or he is going to slay Rama who is exiled by his father, and helpless! Perchance the son of Kaikeyi desires to slay Rama in order to gain complete possession of the kingdom. But Rama, the son of Dasaratha, is my Lord, my Supporter and my Friend, I command you, therefore, to don your armour and take up arms, lining the banks of the Ganges for the protection of Rama. Let my servants and the troops living on fruit, roots and flesh guard the ferry boats of the Ganges. Let five hundred boats be manned with their crews, and let each be guarded by youthful watermen well armed and accoutred. See that they are vigilant. If Prince Bharata be well disposed towards Rama, his army may cross the Ganges to-day.”

Thus, mobilising his troops and servants, Guha the chief of ferrymen, taking gifts of fish, flesh and honey, went to meet Prince Bharata. Seeing Guha approaching, the excellent Sumantra said to Bharata: “This Guha attended by a thousand kinsmen is the king of this place, he is a native of these parts and is fully acquainted with the forest, he is a friend of your brother, Shri Rama. Therefore, O Prince, let him be admitted in audience to you, he assuredly knows the place where Rama and Lakshmana dwell.”

Hearing the words of the sagacious Sumantra, Bharata said: “Go and tell Guha that I desire to meet him.”

The sanction of Prince Bharata being given, Guha with the chiefs of his people approached the prince and thus addressed him: “O Lord, consider this country as thine own domain; not being acquainted with thine intention, I am unable to offer you a fitting welcome. This inconsiderable kingdom is thine and we also are thine! We entreat you to abide in your servant’s house. I have brought roots, fruits and flesh both fresh and dried for you and other products of the forest for your use. It is my hope that thine army remain here to-night as my guests; may we have occasion to serve you, O Prince; to-morrow you canst go forward with thine army.”