“Having overcome Yama the foremost of the Gods, the Tennecked Ravana, proud warrior, went to seek out his followers. Beholding him with his limbs covered with blood, riddled with wounds, they were amazed. With Marica at their head, they offered felicitations to him on his victory and re-assured by him, they all took their places in the Pushpaka Chariot. Thereafter the Rakshasa descended into the watery region inhabited by Daityas and Uragas under the powerful protection of Varuna. From there he went to the Capital Bhogavati, where Vasuki reigns, and, having subjugated the Nagas, he joyfully entered the city made of precious stones. There the Nivatakavacas, Daityas protected by Brahma dwelt, and the Rakshasa, approaching them, challenged them to fight. Instantly those intrepid Daityas, full of valour, armed with every weapon in their martial ardour, rushed out joyfully.

“Then the Rakshasas and Danavas struck each other furiously with spears, tridents, Kalishas, harpoons, swords and Parash-vadhas and, while they fought thus, a whole year passed away without either side being victorious or suffering defeat.

“At the end of that time, the Grandsire, Lord of the Three Worlds, the imperishable God, appeared in his marvellous chariot and, in order to bring the bellicose activities of the Nivatakavacas to a close, that Ancient One made known to them the purpose of his intervention, saying:—

“‘Ravana cannot be overcome in battle by the Gods or Asuras and you yourselves cannot be destroyed even by the Immortals and Danavas together. It would find favour with me, if the Rakshasas were joined with you in friendship; undoubtedly all benefits are shared by friends.’

“Thereupon, in the presence of fire, Ravana concluded an alliance with the Nivatakavacas and became their friend.

“Honoured by them according to tradition, he sojourned in that place for a year, where he passed his time exactly as in his own city. There, having studied a hundred forms of magic he became proficient in one, then he set out to explore Rasatala in order to discover the capital of the Lord of the Waters, Varuna. Reaching the City of Ashma, he slew all the inhabitants and, with his sword, pierced his powerful brother-in-law, Vidyujjihva, the consort of Shurpanakha, who was proud of his strength and who, with his tongue, was licking a Rakshasa, preparatory to devouring him. Having slain him, Ravana thereafter, in an instant, destroyed four hundred Daityas. It was then that the celestial abode of Varuna, resembling a cloud, dazzling as Mount Kailasha, appeared to that monarch, and he beheld there the Cow, Surabha, from whom milk ever flows which forms the Ocean Kshiroda.

“Ravana saw Vararani, Mother of cows and bulls also, from whom is born Candra of cooling rays, who ushers in the night, taking refuge under whom, the great Rishis subsist on the froth of that milk from which the Nectar of Immortality, the food of the Gods sprang, as also Svadha, the food of the Pitris. Having circumambulated that wonderful Cow, known to men as Surabha, Ravana penetrated into a formidable region defended by troops of every kind. It was then he beheld the splendid residence of Varuna, abounding in hundreds of cataracts, ever wearing a delightful aspect and resembling an autumn cloud.

“Having struck down the leaders of the army in battle, whom he riddled with blows, Ravana said to those warriors:—

‘Speedily inform the King that Ravana has come hither seeking battle, saying “Accept this challenge if you are not afraid, otherwise, paying obeisance to him declare, ‘I am defeated!””

“Meantime, the sons and grandsons of the magnanimous Varuna, provoked, set out with Go and Pushkara.

“Those valiant beings, surrounded by their troops, harnessed their chariots that coursed wheresoever they desired and shone like the rising sun.

“Thereafter a terrible struggle ensued, causing the hair to stand on end, between the children of the Lord of the Waters and the crafty Ravana. The brave companions of the Rakshasa Dashagriva, in an instant, destroyed Varuna’s entire army.

“Seeing their army struck down in the fight, the sons of Varuna, overwhelmed by a hail of missiles, broke off the conflict and, as they were escaping underground, they beheld Ravana in the Pushpaka Chariot and hurled themselves into the sky in their fleet cars. Having attained an equally advantageous position, a desperate fight broke out afresh and a terrible conflict arose in the air like unto that between the Gods and the Danavas. With their shafts, like unto Pavaka’s, they put Ravana to flight and, in their joy, emitted countless shouts of triumph.

“Then Mahodara, provoked, on seeing Ravana thus sore pressed, banished all fear of death and, in his martial ardour, casting infuriated glances round about, with his mace struck the chariots that were coursing at will with the speed of the wind, causing them to fall on the earth. Having slain the soldiers and destroyed the chariots of Varuna’s sons, Mahodara, seeing them deprived of their cars, emitted a loud shout. The chariots with their steeds and their excellent drivers, destroyed by Mahodara, lay on the earth and, though bereft of their vehicles, the sons of the magnanimous Varuna, by virtue of their natural prowess, remained courageously in the sky without being perturbed. Stretching their bows, they pierced Mahodara and, gathering together, they surrounded Ravana on the battlefield and, with their formidable shafts, like unto thunderbolts loosed from their bows, they overwhelmed him in their rage, as clouds rain down on a great mountain.

“On his side, the irascible Dashagriva, like unto the fire of dissolution, showered down a fearful hail of missiles on their vital parts with irresistible and uninterrupted force, and there were maces of every kind, Bhallas in their hundreds, harpoons, lances and huge Shataghnis. Then Varuna’s sons, reduced to walking on foot, saw themselves restricted like unto sixty-year old elephants who have entered a great morass and, beholding the sons of Varuna thus stricken and exhausted, the supremely powerful Ravana emitted shouts of joy like unto an immense doud, and letting forth those loud roars, he struck Varuna’s offspring with shafts of every kind which he showered down upon them like a cloud.

“Thereupon they turned back and fell headlong to the ground and their followers carried them hastily from the battlefield to their homes, whilst the Rakshasa cried out ‘Carry the tidings to Varuna!’

“Thereafter one of Varuna’s counsellors, named Prahasta, answered him saying:—

“‘Varuna, the Lord of the Waters, that mighty monarch, whom you are challenging to combat, has gone to Brahmaloka to hear the Gandharva music. Why exhaust thyself in vain, O Hero, since the King is not here?’

“Then the Lord of the Rakshasas, having heard this, proclaimed his name and emitted joyful cries; thereafter, issuing out of Varuna’s abode and returning from whence he had come, Ravana ascended into the sky and directed his course to Lanka.”

“Thereafter Ravana’s war-intoxicated followers ranged the City of Ashma and Dashanana beheld there a great palace, the archways of which were set with emeralds and adorned with a network of pearls. Abounding in golden pillars and sacred altars, the stairways, made of gold, were studded with diamonds and hung with small bells and delightful seats placed here and there, so that it resembled the palace of Mahendra.

“Beholding that beautiful dwelling, the supremely powerful Ravana reflected within himself:—

‘Whose is this marvellous mansion like unto the peak of Mount Meru? Go, O Prahasta and ascertain speedily to whom this residence belongs!’

“Thereupon Prahasta entered that excellent abode and, finding no one in the first apartment, he went to another, penetrating into seven rooms till at last he observed a fire burning, in the flames of which he beheld a man seated, laughing aloud; and, hearing that dreadful laughter, Prahasta’s hair stood on end. The man thus seated as if unconscious in the fire, blinding to look upon as the sun and like unto Yama himself, was wearing a golden chain. Beholding this, that nightranger speedily left the house and communicated all to Ravana.

“O Rama, Dashagriva, resembling a piece of collyrium, alighting from Pushpaka, sought to enter that dwelling but a huge-bodied person, moon-crested, barred the door. His tongue resembled a flame, his eyes were red, his teeth dazzling, his lips like the Bimba Fruit, his nose dreadful and he was handsome of form with a neck curved like a conch, marked with three lines, his jaws enormous, his beard thick, his bones well covered with flesh, possessing large fangs, his whole aspect terrible, causing the hair to stand on end; and he held a mace in his hand as he stood at the door; then as Ravana beheld him, his hair rose on end, his heart beat furiously and his body trembled.

“Perceiving these inauspicious omens, Ravana began to ponder within himself and while he was reflecting thus, that Being addressed him, saying:—

“‘Of what art you thinking, O Rakshasa? Tell me without fear! I shall confer the pleasure of combat on you, O Hero, O Night-ranger!’

“Thereafter he spoke again to Ravana, saying:—

“‘Dost you desire to enter into conflict with Bali or hast you some other intention?’

“Hearing these words, Ravana was overwhelmed with fear so that his hair stood on end but, recollecting himself, he answered:-

“‘O You, the foremost of those skilled in speech, who resides in this mansion? I would enter into combat with him if you counsdlest me to do so1’

“Then that Being answered him, saying:—

“‘The Lord of the Danavas lives here; he is supremely magnanimous, valiant, possessing truth for his prowess, endowed with many qualities, resplendent, like unto Yama bearing a noose in his hand, bright as the rising sun, incapable of being defeated in combat, impetuous, invincible, victorious, a veritable ocean of accomplishments, soft-spoken, the support of those who depend on him, devoted to his preceptor and the brahmins, conversant with the proper time (for executing actions), gifted with great powers, truthful, handsome, skilful, heroic, ever engaged in die study of the Veda; though walking on foot, he moves like the wind, he shines like fire, radiating heat like the sun, he stands in awe of neither Gods, spirits, snakes nor birds, fear is unknown to him. Dost you wish to fight with Bali, O Lord of the Rakshasas, O You gifted with supreme energy? Then enter this abode speedily and engage in the encounter!’

“Being thus addressed, the Ten-necked Titan went in to where Bali was, and that foremost of the Danavas, who resembled a flame of fire and was as hard to gaze upon as the sun, beholding the Lord of Lanka, burst into laughter and, taking the Rakshasa by the hand placed him on his lap, saying:—

“‘O Ten-necked Lord of the Rakshasas, O Long-armed One, what desire of thine shall I gratify? Say what has brought you hither?’

“Being thus addressed by Bali, Ravana answered:—

“‘O Illustrious One, I have heard that formerly you were imprisoned by Vishnu, verily I have the power to release you from these bonds!’

“Hearing these words of Ravana, Bali laughed and said:—

“‘Hear and I will tell you, O Ravana! The Dark-hued One Who stands at the door, formerly subdued all the Danavas and other powerful Lords and I also was imprisoned by Him. He is as invincible as Death; none in the world can delude Him. He, Who stands at the entrance, is the Destroyer, Creator and Preserver, Lord of the Three Worlds. Neither you nor I know Him; He is the Lord of the past, present and future, He is Time, He is the Kali Yuga, He overthrows all beings; He is the Creator and Destroyer of the Three Worlds and of all animate and inanimate things; that great God of all Gods creates and re-creates the universe again and again for ever. O Nightranger, He is the Dispenser of the fruits of sacrifices, gifts and oblations, verily He is the Creator and Preserver of the entire Universe, there is none in the Three Worlds comparable with Him in majesty and glory. O Scion of the House of Paulastya. He has the Danavas, our forbears, and you, under His control, like beasts bound with ropes.

‘“Vritra, Danu, Shuka, Shambu, Nishumbha, Shumbha, Kalanemi, Prahlada and others, Kuta, Virocana, Mridu, Yamala, Arjuna, Kansa, Kaitabha and Madhu all radiated heat like the sun and were as resplendent as its rays, all moved like the wind and showered down rain like unto Indra, all celebrated sacrifices and underwent severe penances, all were exalted of soul and followers of the Path of Yoga, all acquired wealth and enjoyed many pleasures, all distributed gifts abundantly, studied the Veda and protected their subjects, all were defenders of their kinsfolk and slayers of their foes, none could stand against them in the Three Worlds and they were powerful, thoroughly conversant with the Shastras and all branches of learning and were never known to retreat in battle.

“‘They ruled the kingdoms of the Gods, having overcome them a thousand times, and they were ever engaged in harassing them and protecting their own followers. Inflated with pride and arrogance, given to attachment, they were as effulgent as the newly risen sun, but the glorious Hari, the Lord Vishnu knows how to bring about the destruction of those who perpetually trouble the Gods. He creates them all and Himself constantly brings about their end; existing by Himself at the time of dissolution.

“‘These highly powerful and illustrious Danava Chiefs, able to assume any form at will, were destroyed by that glorious God, and further, all those heroes, said to be invincible and irresistible in warfare, have been discomfited by the wondrous power of Kritanta [i.e., The incarnation of the force of destiny].’

“Having spoken thus to Ravana, the Lord of the Danavas again addressed the King of the Rakshasas, saying:—

“‘O Hero, O You gifted with great strength, take up this shining disc that you seest and draw near to my side; I shall then tell you how I have broken my bonds forever. Do what I have told you, O Long-armed One, delay not!’

“O Descendant of Raghu, hearing this, the highly powerful Rakshasa, laughing, proceeded to where that celestial disc was. Proud of his strength he deemed himself able to lift it with ease but, taking hold of it, he could not move it by any means and, being ashamed, that highly powerful one again attempted it and barely raising it, that Rakshasa immediately fell to the earth unconscious, bathed in a pool of blood, like unto a Sala Tree that has been felled.

“Meantime the counsellors of the Lord of the Rakshasas, who were in the Pushpaka Chariot, cried out loudly ‘Alas! Alas!’ and thereafter, the Rakshasa, regaining his senses, rose up, his head bowed in shame and Bali said to him:—

“‘Draw near, O Foremost of the Rakshasas, and listen to my words, O Hero! This disc encrusted with gems, which you didst seek to lift, was an ornament for the ear belonging to one of my forbears and has remained here where it fell, look upon it 1 O You, endowed with great strength, the other fell on the summit of a mountain and, besides these two, his crown also fell on the earth before an altar during the encounter. Formerly neither time, death nor disease could overcome mine ancestor Hiranyakashipu, nor could he be visited by death during the day, at dawn or dusk. O Foremost of the Rakshasas, neither a dry nor a wet object nor any weapon could encompass his end.

“‘It came about that he entered into a dreadful quarrel with Prahlada and antagonism having grown up between him and the defenceless and courageous Prahlada, the Lord appeared in the form of Nrsingha, he of dreadful aspect who was the cause of terror to all beings. O Foremost of the Rakshasas, that awful Being, casting glances here and there, overwhelmed the Three Worlds and, taking up Hiranyakashipu in his arms, he tore his body open with his nails; that same Being, the supreme and taintless Vasudeva stands at the door! I shall now tell you of that supreme God, do you hear me, if my words have any significance for you. He who stands at the door has subdued thousands of Indras and hundreds and thousands of great Gods and Rishis.’

“Hearing these words, Ravana said:—

“‘I have beheld Kritanta, the Lord of Spirits and Death Himself! His hair is formed of serpents and scorpions, he bears a noose in his hand, his tongue is like unto a flame of fire darting like lightning, his jaws dreadful, his eyes red; he is endowed with immense speed and is the terror of all beings, like unto the sun incapable of being looked upon. Unconquerable in combat, the chastiser of evil-doers, yet even he was overcome in conflict, nor did I experience the least fear of him, O Lord of the Danavas. I do not know this person (at the door), it behoves you to tell me who he is.’

“Hearing these words of Ravana, Bali, the Son of Virocana, answered:—

“‘He is the Lord Hari, Narayana, the Protector of the Three Worlds. He is Ananta, Kapila, Vishnu and the highly effulgent Nrsingha; He is Kratudhama and Sudhama who bears the dreadful mace in his hands. He resembles the Twelve Adityas, He is the first Man, the primeval and excellent Purusha; He is like unto a dark blue cloud and is the first Lord of the Gods. O Long-armed One, He is encircled by flame; He is the supreme Yogi, beloved of His devotees; He projected the universe, preserves it and destroys it, assuming the form of Time endowed with great power. This Hari, bearing the discus in His hand, is the sacrifice and is worshipped in the sacrifice, He is the one great form of all the Gods, all beings, all worlds and all knowledge; He is Baladeva, O Mighty-armed One, the Slayer of Warriors; He has the eye of a hero and is the eternal Guru, the Father of the Three Worlds. All Sages, desirous of liberation, meditate on Him. He who knows Him thus, is freed from sin; he, who remembers, adores and worships Him, attains all.’

“Hearing these words of Bali, the highly powerful Ravana, his eyes red with anger, went out with uplifted weapons.

“Beholding him thus inflamed with fury, the Lord Hari, Who bore a club in His hand, reflected, ‘In deference to Brahma, I shall not slay this sinner yet,’ and making himself invisible, He vanished.

“Then Ravana, not beholding that Purusha there, rejoiced, and, shouting exultantly, issued out of Varuna’s abode and departed by the same way by which he had come.”

“After reflecting awhile, the Lord of Lanka went to the Solar Region, passing the night on the enchanting summit of Mount Sumeru. Riding in the Pushpaka Chariot, which was endowed with the speed of the sun’s steeds, he, by various ways advanced, and beheld the glorious and resplendent Sun, the purifier of all, adorned with golden bracelets and crowned with a halo encrusted with gems. His lovely countenance was graced with a pair of brilliant earrings, his person embellished with Keyuras, golden ornaments and garlands of crimson lotuses. His body was annointed with red sandalwood and he was blazing with a thousand rays.

“Beholding the Sun, foremost of the Gods, Surya, that primeval Deity without end or middle, having Uchaisravas as his steed, He the Witness of the World, Lord of the Earth, Ravana was overwhelmed by His rays and said to Prahasta:—

“‘O Counsellor, do you go at my behest and apprise the Sim of mine intention saying, ‘Ravana has come hither to challenge you, do you fight or admit defeat; do one or the other speedily!’

“Hearing these words, that Rakshasa advanced towards the sun and beheld two door-keepers named Pingala and Dandi and, having communicated Ravana’s resolutions to them, he stood silent, being overpowered by the sun’s rays.

“Approaching the Sun, Dandi related the matter to him and, hearing of Ravana’s intention, the sagacious Surya, that enemy of the night, said to him:—

“‘O Dandi, either subdue Ravana or say to him “I have been defeated, do as you deemest best!”

“At this command, Dandi approached the high-souled Ravana and informed him of what the Sun had said.

“Hearing Dandi’s words, the Lord of the Rakshasas proclaimed his victory by a roll of drums and went away.”

“Having passed the night on the enchanting summit of Mount Sumeru and deliberated for some time, the mighty Lord of Lanka went to the region of the moon. There be beheld one sprinkled with heavenly unguents, seated in his chariot attended by Apsaras and being embraced by them, proceeding on his way, worn out by the gratification of desire.

Seeing such a person, his curiosity was aroused and, observing a Rishi, named Parvata, there, he said to him:—

“‘You are welcome, O Blessed Sage, verily you have come at a fitting moment! Who is this shameless being proceeding in a chariot attended by Apsaras? He appears to be unaware of his peril?’

“Thus addressed by Ravana, the Rishi Parvata, said to him:—

“‘O Child, O You gifted with high intelligence, hear me and I will tell you the truth. By him all these worlds have been subdued and Brahma propitiated, and he is on his way to a blissful place. As you, by virtue of asceticism, hast conquered the worlds, O Lord of the Rakshasas, so has he; and, having drunk the Soma-juice and performed many pious acts, he has set forth on his journey. O Foremost of the Rakshasas, you are valiant and hast truth for your prowess; the mighty are never offended by the virtuous!’

“Then Ravana beheld a large and excellent car, radiant and effulgent, from which the sound of music and singing issued and he said:—

“‘O Great Rishi, who is that person endowed with radiance who proceeds surrounded by charming singers, dancing girls and Kinneras?’

“Hearing these words, Parvata, the foremost of Sages, again replied:—

“‘He is a hero, a mighty warrior, who has never retreated in battle. Having performed innumerable heroic feats in combat and slain many adversaries, he has received countless wounds and finally sacrificed his life for his master. Having destroyed a myriad people in battle, he has at last been slain by his enemies. He is now to be a guest of Indra or, it may be that he is going to some other auspicious region. This foremost of men is being entertained by singing and dancing.’

“Then Ravana enquired once more:—

“‘Who goes yonder shining like the sun?’

“Hearing Ravana’s words, Parvata said:—

“‘That person, resembling the full moon, adorned with various ornaments and robes, O Mighty King, whom you behold in a great chariot accompanied by troops of Apsaras, has distributed much gold, therefore he proceeds in supreme effulgence in a swiftly coursing car.’

“Hearing Parvata’s words, Ravana said again:—

“‘O Foremost of Rishis, do you tell me which of these kings proceeding here, if entreated, will grant me the pleasure of battle? Verily you are my father; do you point out to me such a one, O You conversant with piety.’

“Thus addressed, Parvata, once more replied to Ravana, saying:—

“‘O Great King, all these monarchs desire heaven not conflict, but, O Mighty One, I shall indicate to you one who will enter into combat with you.

“‘There is a supremely powerful king, the Lord of the Seven Islands, well known by the name of Mandhata, who will do battle with you.’

“Hearing these words of Parvata, Ravana said:—

“‘Do you tell me where this king does dwell, O You of great devotion, I shall go to where that foremost of men resides.’

“Hearing Ravana’s words, the Sage said again:—

“‘The son of Yuvaneshwa, having conquered the world consisting of the Seven Islands, from sea to sea, Mandhata, the foremost of kings is coming here.’

“Thereupon the long-armed Ravana, proud of the boon conferred upon him in the Three Worlds, beheld the heroic Mandhata, the Lord of Ayodhya and the foremost of monarchs. The Lord of the Seven Islands was proceeding in a gilded and decorated car resplendent as that of Mahendra, radiant in his own beauty, sprinkled with celestial unguents, and the Tennecked One said to him:—‘Do you give me battle!’

“Being thus addressed, he, laughing, said to Dashanana:—

“‘If your life is not dear to you, then enter into combat with me, O Rakshasa!’

“Hearing these words of Mandhata, Ravana said:—

“‘Ravana has experienced no harm from Varuna, Kuvera or Yama, what should he fear from a mere man?’

“Having spoken thus, the Lord of the Rakshasas issued orders to the titans who were invincible in battle, whereupon, in fury, the counsellors of the wicked-souled Rakshasa, well skilled in the art of warfare, began to discharge a hail of arrows.

“Then the mighty monarch, Mandhata, with golden feathered shafts, assailed Prahasta, Shuka, Sarana, Mahodara, Virupaksha, Akampana and other generals, and Prahasta covered the king with arrows but, before they reached him, that foremost of men shattered them to pieces. As grass is consumed by fire so was that host of Rakshasas consumed by the King Mandhata by means of hundreds of Bushundis, Bhallas, Bhindipalas and Tomaras. As Karttikeya sundered Mount Krauncha with his shafts, so did Mandhata, full of rage, pierce Prahasta with five Tomaras endowed with supreme velocity and, brandishing his mace, resembling Yama’s, again and again he struck Ravana’s chariot violently and that club resembling lightning, fell with force so that Ravana was thrown down like unto Shakra’s banner. Thereafter the joy of King Mandhata was increased, as the waters of the salty ocean at the time of the full moon, but the entire Rakshasa Host, shrieking with terror, stood round the unconscious Lord of the Rakshasas. Speedily regaining his senses, Ravana, the terror of all beings, Lord of Lanka, showered missiles on the person of Mandhata and, beholding that king falling unconscious, the highly powerful rangers of the night were greatly delighted and emitted leonine roars.

“Regaining his senses in a moment, the King of Ayodhya, beholding his adversary acclaimed by his followers and ministers, was enraged, and assuming a dazzling form like unto the sun or moon, instantly began to slay the titans with a dreadful hail of shafts; and his arrows and the noise thereof overwhelmed the entire Rakshasa Host, that resembled a tempestuous ocean.

“Thereupon a fearful conflict arose between man and demon and those two heroic and high-souled leaders of men and Rakshasas, like persons possessed, taking up the attitude of warriors, entered the field with swords and bows and, highly enraged, began to assail each other with shafts, wounding each other in the attack. Then, setting the Raudra-weapon on his bow, Ravana discharged it, but Mandhata turned it aside with the Fire-weapon. Thereafter Dashanana took up the Gandharva weapon and King Mandhata the Brahma-astra, a source of terror to all. And Ravana took up the Celestial and dreadful Pashupata-weapon, the increaser of fear in the Three Worlds, obtained from Rudra, by virtue of his rigid penances.

“Beholding this, all moveable and immoveable beings were stricken with terror and the Three Worlds, including all that was animate and inanimate, Gods and Serpents, together took refuge in their abodes under the earth.

“Meantime, by virtue of their meditation, the two foremost of ascetics, Paulastya and Galava, aware of the conflict, remonstrated with these two warriors in various ways and restrained the King and the Lord of the Rakshasas. Thereafter the man and the Rakshasa were reconciled and, highly delighted, returned from whence they had come.”

“The two Rishis having departed, Ravana, the Lord of the Rakshasas, proceeded for forty thousand miles in the upper air, whereupon he reached that excellent higher sphere where swans, endowed with every virtue, dwell. And, having gone on, he ascended yet higher for ten thousand leagues, where on all sides, the clouds, Agneya, Pakshana and Brahma are eternally established. Thereafter, he proceeded to an excellent airy region where the high-souled Siddhas and Caranas ever abide, which is ten thousand leagues in extent.

“O Slayer of your Foes, he then passed to a fourth region, where the Bhutas and Vinayakas perpetually sojourn and thereafter, he went to the fifth aerial realm, which extends over ten thousand leagues, where Ganga, the foremost of rivers is to be found, and the elephants headed by Kumuda, from whose bodies, drops pour down constantly as they sport in the waters, spout forth the sacred stream which they sprinkle in all directions. Here the waters fall down in rain and snow under the rays of the sun, purified by the wind, O Raghava.

“Then that Rakshasa went to the sixth aerial region, O You endowed with great radiance, where Garuda dwells, ever revered by his kinsfolk and friends, and, thereafter, ascended to the seventh aerial region, lying ten thousand leagues higher, where the Seven Rishis dwell. And again proceeding ten thousand leagues higher he reached the eighth aerial region where Ganga, known as the Ganges of the sky, having strong currents, is found in the path of the sun and, who, upheld by air, sends forth a great roaring.

“Now I shall describe the region yet higher than these, where the Moon-god dwells and the extent thereof is eighty thousand leagues. There the Moon encircled by stars and planets, from whom hundreds and thousands of rays stream forth, illumines the world, bringing happiness to all beings.

“Thereupon, beholding Dashagriva, the Moon, blazing up as it were, consumed him with its cold fires and, stricken with fear of those rays, his counsellors were unable to withstand them and Prahasta, uttering the words ‘Let victory be thine!’ thereafter said:—

“‘O King, we are being destroyed by the cold and must leave this place! O Foremost of Monarchs, the icy rays of the moon have the property of fire.’

“Hearing the words of Prahasta, Ravana, beside himself with wrath, lifted his bow, twanging it and began to assail the Moon with Narachas, whereupon Brahma speedily went to that lunar region and said:—

“‘O Ten-necked One, O Mighty-armed One, 0 Son of Vishravas, O Gentle One, do you go hence from here speedily; do not oppress the Moon, for that highly effulgent King of the Twice-born desires the well-being of all. I will bestow a mystical formula on you! He who recollects it at the hour of death, does not succumb!’

“Thus addressed, the Ten-necked Rakshasa, with joined palms, said:—

“‘O God, if I have found favour with you, then, O Lord of the Worlds, O You of great penances, impart that sacred mantra to me, O You truly Pious One, reciting which, O Great One, I shall be liberated from fear of the Celestials. Verily, by Your favour, O Lord of the Gods, I shall become invincible to all the Asuras, Danavas and Birds.’

“Thus accosted, Brahma said to Dashanana:—

“‘O Lord of the Rakshasas, do not repeat this mantra daily but only when your life is in danger. Holding a string of Rud-raksha beads and repeating it, you shalt become invincible; but if you dost not recite it, you shalt not meet with success.

Hear and I shall communicate this sacred formula to you, O Foremost of the Rakshasas, reciting which you shalt obtain victory in the encounter:—

“‘Salutations unto You, O God, 0 Lord of Lords, O You worshipped by the Celestials and Asuras. O You, the same in the past, present and future, O Great God, O You having tawny eyes, O You, a boy assuming the form of an aged Being, O You who wearest a tiger skin. O God, You are worthy to be worshipped and art the Lord of the Three Worlds. You are Ishvara, Hara, Haratanemi, the Fire at the end of the World Cycle, Yugantadahaka; You are Baladeva, You are Ganesha, Lokashambu, and Lokapala, You are endowed with huge arms, You are blessed, the Bearer of the Trident; You are possessed of dreadful teeth and jaws, the greatest of the Gods, You are Time, You are Power, You are the Blue-throated and possessed of a huge belly, You are Devantaka, the foremost of the ascetics and the Lord of all creatures. You are the Leader, Protector, Hari-Hara, Destroyer and Preserver, You wearest matted locks, art clean-shaven and wrapped in a loincloth, You are mighty and illustrious, You are the Lord of Spirits and Goblins, the Support of all, Protector of all, Destroyer of all, the Creator and the Eternal Preceptor, You are the Bearer of the Kamandalu, the Wielder of the Pinaka Bow and the Dhurjata. You are worthy of veneration, You are Aum, the highest of all, the First Chanter of the Sama-Veda. You are Death and the nature of death, Pariyatra and the Observer of great vows; You are a brahmacari dwelling in a cave bearing a Vina, Panava and quiver in thine hands; You are immortal, lovely to look upon as the newly risen sun; You dwellest in the crematorium; You are the illustrious Lord of Uma, transcending all taint; You didst pluck out the eyes of Bhagadeva and the teeth of Pusha. You are the overcomer of fever and bearest a noose in Your hand, verily You are Dissolution and Time of the flaming mouth, fire being Your symbol, You are highly effulgent and the Lord of men. You are demented and causest people to tremble; You are the Fourth and deeply venerated of men, You are the Holy Dwarf, Vamanadeva, and the Dwarf who circumambulates the East. You wearest the semblance of a beggar with three locks, and art crafty by nature. You didst stay the hand of Indra and of the Vasus, You are the Seasons, the Creator of seasons; You are Time, Honey and the One of honey eyes. You are the Lord of herbs, a lordly tree bearing fruit and flowers; Your seat is made of arrows; You are ever worshipped by people in all conditions; You are the Creator and Protector of the Universe, the Eternal and true Purusha; You are the Controller of Righteousness, Virupaksha, the Three Dharmas, the Protector of all beings. You are the Three-eyed One of many forms blazing like a million suns, You are the Lord of the Celestials, the foremost of the Gods, bearing matted locks and the crescent moon, You are worthy of being approached and art one with created beings; You are the Player of all musical instruments, ever creating and binding all, and dost bring about the liberation of all beings. You are Pushpadanta, indivisible, the foremost of Destroyers; You have tawny beards, bearest a bow and art fearful and endowed with terrible might.’

“‘These hundred and eight sacred and excellent names, uttered by me, destroy all sins, bestow merit and give refuge to those who seek it. O Dashanana, if you dost recite them, you shalt be able to overcome your foes!’”

“Having conferred that favour on Ravana, the Grandsire, sprung from the lotus, speedily went to his own region and Ravana, having obtained the boon, departed.

“After a few days, that Scourge of the Worlds, the Rakshasa Ravana with his counsellors reached the banks of the western ocean and, on an island, a person was seen seated there alone, bright as fire, named Mahajambunada. His form was dreadful like unto the Fire of Dissolution and, beholding that highly powerful Being resembling Mahendra, the Chief of the Gods among the Celestials, or the sun among the planets, a lion among the Sharabhas, Airavata among elephants, Sumeru among mountains and Parijata among trees, Dashagriva said:—

“‘Enter into combat with me 1’ and his eyes flickered like a cluster of planets [i.e., Grahamala—A cluster of planets or meteors]. Gnashing his teeth, he made a sound like a grinding mill and the highly powerful Dashanana amidst his counsellors, roared aloud. Thereafter with darts, Shads, Rishtis and Pattikas, be assailed that highly effulgent Being of long arms, dread aspect, huge teeth, grim form, conch-like neck, broad chest, frog-like belly, leonine countenance, feet like unto the summit of Mount Kailasha, the palms of his hands and the soles of his feet like unto red lotuses, endowed with the swiftness of thought and the wind, terrifying, bearing a quiver, adorned with bells and chowries, encircled by flames, emitting a sweet sound like a net-work of Kinkinis [i.e., Small bells], wearing a garland of golden flowers round his neck, noble, like unto the Rig-Veda and resembling the Anjana or Golden Mountain.

“As a lion remains unmoved by the attack of a wolf or an elephant, or Mount Sumeru by the King of the Serpents, or the vast ocean by the current of a river, neither was that great Being perturbed, but addressing Dashagriva, said:—

“‘O Vicious-minded Night-ranger, I shall soon rid you of your desire for combat.’

“O Rama, the might of that Being was a thousand times greater than Ravana’s, which was a source of terror to the worlds. Piety and asceticism, which are the roots of attainment of everything in the world, are in his thighs, desire is in his maleorgan, the Vishvadevas are at his waist and the winds at the side of his intestines; the eight Vasus dwell in his middle, the oceans abide in his belly, the quarters are his hips, the Maruts his joints, the Pittris are at his back and the Grandsire has taken refuge in his heart. Charitable acts of making many gifts of kine, gold and land are the hair in his armpits; the Mountains, Himalaya, Hemakuta, Mandara and Meru are his bones, the thunderbolt is in his palm, the sky in his frame, the evening rain-clouds are on his neck; the Creator and Preserver and the Vidyadharas are his arms; Ananta, Vasuki, Vishalaksha, Iravat, Kamvala, Asvatara, Karkotaka, Dhananjaya, the venomous Takshaka and Utpatakshaka have taken shelter under his nails in order to vomit forth their poison. Fire is in his mouth, the Rudras on his shoulders; the fortnights, months, years and seasons in his jaws, the lunar fortnight and the dark half of the month are his nostrils, the airy currents are the pores of his body, Sarasvati with her Vina is in his throat, the Asvins are in his ears and the sun and moon in his two eyes.

“O Rama, all the branches of the Veda and the sacrifices, the whole galaxy of stars, sweet speech, good deeds, energy and asceticism are supported by his body in human form.

“Then that Purusha struck Ravana playfully with his hands, which were as powerful as lightning and, thus assailed, Ravana fell to the ground immediately and having put that Night-ranger to flight that great Purusha, like unto the Rig-Veda, resembling a mountain be-decked with lotus wreaths, entered the region under the earth.

“Then Ravana addressed his counsellors thus:—

“‘O Prahasta, O Shuka, O Sarana and you other ministers, where has that Purusha suddenly gone? Do you tell me!’

“Hearing the words of Ravana, the Night-rangers said:—

‘That Purusha, who crushes the pride of Devas and Danavas, has entered into that place!’

“As Garuda swoops on a serpent so did that wicked-minded Ravana speedily approach the entrance of that cave and entered it fearlessly. Penetrating there, he beheld three warriors, dark like unto collyrium, wearing Keyuras [i.e., An ornament used at the waist], adorned with red garlands, besmeared with sandalpaste, bedecked with diverse golden ornaments set with gems; and he saw three crores of exalted beings, fearless, pure, radiant as fire, intent on dancing.

“Beholding them, Dashagriva was not in the least afraid but watched them gyrating whilst he stood at the entrance; and they all resembled the Maha-Purusha, who had previously been seen by him, and all were of similar colour, dress, form and all equally endowed with energy. Then the hair of Dashagriva stood on end as he gazed upon them but, on account of the boon he had received from the Self-born, he issued out of that place alive. Thereafter he saw the Maha Purusha lying on a couch, and his dwelling, his seat and his bed were all white and costly and he slept there enveloped in flames.

“And there, with a fan in her lotus-like hands sat the Goddess Lakshmi, most beautiful in all the Three Worlds and their decoration, as it were; chaste, adorned with celestial garlands, sprinkled with excellent sandal-paste, bedecked with rich ornaments and clad in costly robes. And the wicked Ravana, Lord of the Rakshasas, having entered there without a counsellor, beholding that chaste damsel of sweet smiles, seated on a royal throne, became filled with desire and wished to hold her by the hand, as one under the sway of death fondles a sleeping serpent.

“Beholding that Lord of the Rakshasas with a loosened garment and knowing him desirous of taking hold of her, the huge-armed Deity, sleeping, enveloped in flames, laughed aloud and suddenly by his power began to consume Ravana, the harasser of his foes, who fell down on the earth like an uprooted tree.

Beholding that Rakshasa fallen, the Purusha addressed him saying:—

“‘Rise up, O Foremost of the Rakshasas, you shalt not meet with death to-day! You shalt live protected by the Grandsire’s boon. Do you therefore go hence without fear, O Ravana, your death is not yet decreed!’

“Regaining consciousness after a while, Ravana was seized with fear and being thus addressed, that enemy of the Gods rose up, his hair standing on end and said to that highly resplendent Deity:—

“‘Who art you endowed with great energy and like unto the Fire of Dissolution? Say who art you, O God and from whence hast you come hither?’

“Being thus accosted by the wicked-minded Ravana, the God, smiling, replied in accents as deep as the muttering of clouds, saying:—

“‘What hast you to do with me, O Dashagriva, you shalt be slain ere long I’

“Being thus addressed, the Ten-necked Rakshasa, with joined palms, said:—

“‘On account of Brahma’s boon, I shall not tread the path of death; there is none born amongst men or Gods who can equal me or, in virtue of his prowess, disregard the Grandsire’s boon. His words may never prove vain nor can any, howsoever he exert himself, prove them to be false; I do not see any in the Three Worlds who could render his boon to me void. O Great God, I am immortal, I do not fear You and even were I to meet with death, may it be through you and none other, O Lord; death at Your hands will bring me glory and renown!’

“Then Ravana endowed with dreadful prowess saw the Three Worlds with all the animate and inanimate creatures within the body of the Deity. The Adityas, the Maruts, the Sadhyas, the Vasus, the Twin Ashvins, the Rudras, the Pittris, Yama, Kuvera, the seas, mountains, rivers, all the branches of learning and of the Veda, Fire, the planets, the stars, the sky, the Siddhas, Gandharvas, Caranas and the Maha Rishis conversant with the knowledge of the Veda, Garuda, the Nagas, the other Gods, Yakshas, Daityas and Rakshasas were all seen in their subtle forms in the limbs of that Purusha lying there.”

On this, the virtuous-souled Rama said to Agastya, the foremost of Munis:—“O Lord, tell me who was that Maha Purusha on that island? Who were those hundreds and thousands of beings? Who is the Purusha who humbles the pride of Daityas and Danavas?”

Hearing Rama’s words, Shri Agastya answered

“O You existing eternally, O God of Gods, hearken and I will tell you. That Purusha on the island was the illustrious Kapila and all those who were dancing are the Deities equalling that intelligent Kapila in energy and power. And that Rakshasa, bent on sin, was not looked on by Him with a wrathful glance, therefore he was not immediately reduced to ashes, but Ravana, who resembled a mountain, with his person pierced, fell to the ground. As a crafty man penetrates a secret, so did that Purusha pierce Ravana’s person with his arrow-like words.

“Thereafter that Rakshasa of great prowess, having regained his senses after a long time, returned to where his counsellors were.”