Having pointed out the beauty of the hills to Sita, Raghava now showed her the pleasant river Mandakini issuing from the mountain. The lotus-eyed Lord addressed the daughter of King Janaka, whose countenance resembled the moon, saying: “O Princess, behold the river Mandakini with its delightful banks frequented by swans, cranes and other waterfowl, abounding in flowering trees of different kinds, which cause it to resemble the river Sangandhika in the region of Kuvera. Its pleasant fords, where I desire to bathe, the waters of which have been rendered muddy by the herds of deer who have come to drink and recently departed, all these attract the heart. O Dear One, the ascetics attired in robes of bark and deerskin, bathe at stated seasons in this river. O Princess of beautiful eyes, here the munis observing strict and austere vows, stand with uplifted arms, worshipping the sun. The trees agitated by the breeze, cause the hills to appear as if they were dancing. The blossoms scattered by the force of the wind make it seem as if Cittrakuta were offering flowers to the river. O Auspicious One, here the waters of Mandakini sparkle like gems and there they form a sandy beach. Groups of perfect beings frequent the banks. O Princess, behold the heaps of flowers shaken down from the branches by the wind, and others floating through the air and falling into the river to be carried away by the water. O Kalyani, behold the wild geese standing in the shallows, uttering sweet cries to summon their mates or diverting themselves with them. O Lovely Sita, when I behold the Cittrakuta mountain and the river Mandakini in company with you, I esteem it a greater joy than any Ayodhya could yield me. Come, O Sita, and let us two bathe in the river Mandakini, frequented by perfect beings who are endowed with inner and outer control and are devoted to the practice of austerity. O Princess, you didst formerly play with your maids of honour in Ayodhya, to-day amuse thyself with me in the Mandakini river, pelting me with red and white lotuses and splashing the waters over me. O Dear One, imagine those dwelling here to be the citizens of Ayodhya and the Mandakini to be the river Sarayu. O Sita, I am happy with you, who art obedient to my command as is also Prince Lakshmana. O Beloved, bathing thrice a day with you in the river and living on honey, fruits and berries, I feel no desire for the comforts of the kingdom of Ayodhya. Who will not be happy, dwelling on the banks of the river Mandakini, where herds of elephants wander and lions and monkeys come to quench their thirst/ and where flowers grow throughout the year?”

Thus Shri Rama conversed on many wondrous things concerning the Mandakini river with Sita and taking the hand of the princess, wandered with her over the blue and beautiful Cittrakuta mountain.