Having issued this command to his brother, that invincible warrior, the Delight of the House of Raghu, endowed with great prowess, girded on his sword in its golden scabbard, and taking up his triply-curved bow, his personal insignia and two quivers filled with arrows, he set forth with long strides. Beholding that Indra among Men, the king of the beasts in fear disappeared only to re-appear once more.

Girt with his sword and bearing his bow in his hand, Rama ran in the direction of the deer and beheld it in all its beauty, close to him. Bow in hand, fixing his eyes on the fawn as it fled into the forest, he saw it sometimes taking a single bound, and then, in order to lure him on, allowing him to draw closer. Timid and fearful, it would leap into the air, at times becoming visible and then disappearing in the depths of the thickets.

As in the autumn, stray clouds pass across the moon’s face, so that she sometimes shines in all her brilliance and at others seems far away, so appearing and disappearing, Marica, in the form of a deer, enticed Rama far from the hermitage.

Kakutstha found himself, despite his exertions, thus beguiled and the fawn, feigning fatigue, would crouch in the grass or, the better to deceive him, join a herd of deer, but when Rama approached, it would take to flight once more, concealing itself, only to re-appear in the distance. Sometimes, in fear, it would make itself invisible, then, with Rama in desperate pursuit, it would appear in a far off thicket. Thereupon increasingly wrath, Rama drew out a death-dealing glittering arrow more brilliant than the sun’s rays and placing it firmly on his bow, stretching it with great energy, let fly that shaft that resembled a fiery serpent.

Loosing that flaming arrow, which resembled a lightning flash, fashioned by Brahma himself, that marvellous shaft, pierced the heart of Marica, who had assumed the form of a deer. Thereat, bounding into the air as high as a palm tree, the titan fell mortally wounded and lay on the earth, having but a few moments to live. On the point of death, emitting a terrible cry, Marica abandoned his assumed form.

Recollecting the words of Ravana and reflecting on how to induce Sita to send away Lakshmana, so that in her isolation she might be borne away, Marica, deeming the moment to be at hand, imitating Rama’s voice, cried out “O Sita, O Lakshmana!”

Stricken to the heart by that extraordinary arrow, discarding his deer’s form, Marica took on the huge shape of a titan. Then Rama, beholding that titan of formidable size, writhing on the earth about to die, his limbs covered with blood, remembered the words of Lakshmana and reflected:—“The illusion created by Marica, spoken of by Lakshmana is manifest, it is Marica whom I have slain. What will Sita not do on hearing the cry of the stricken titan: ‘O Sita, O Lakshmana’? To what a pass will the mighty Lakshmana now have come?”

Thus did the virtuous Rama reflect, his hair standing on end and, having slain the titan in the form of a deer and heard his cry, a great dread seized him.

That dappled fawn being slain, Rama speedily killed and seized the carcase of another deer and hastened towards the hermitage.