Having received the homage of the ascetics, at dawn Rama paid obeisance to them and followed by Lakshmana, entered the forest, which abounded in every kind of deer and was frequented by bears and tigers.

There, trees, creepers and shrubs had been trampled underfoot, so that the paths were barely distinguishable and the reflection from the pools and lakes was dazzling; no birds sang in that whole demesne, which was filled with the humming of crickets. [Note: The Commentaor explains that all this destruction was due to the presence of the demon Viradha and that the birds had deserted the place in fear of him.]

Followed by Lakshmana, Rama searched the depths of the forest with his gaze and in that wood, abounding in ferocious beasts, Kakutstha, accompanied by Sita, beheld a titan as large as a mountain creating a great uproar.

Of formidable aspect, hideous, deformed, his eyes sunk deep in his forehead, with a vast mouth and protruding belly, clad in a tiger skin, covered with blood and loathsome to look upon, he struck terror into the hearts of all beings; it appeared as if death itself were approaching with open jaws.

Three lions, four tigers, two leopards, four dappled deer and the head of a great elephant with its tusks, from which the fat ran down, hung from his spear.

Seeing Rama, Lakshmana and Sita, the Princess of Mithila, he rushed upon them in fury, like Time at the destruction of the worlds. Then, creating a great uproar, causing the earth to tremble, he seized Vaidehi in his arms and began to carry her away, saying:—

“O You, wearing matted locks, clad in robes of bark, accompanied by a common consort, you are about to die! Entering the Dandaka Forest, armed with weapons, bows and spears, whence have you come, O Ascetics and why do you dwell here in the company of a woman? Perverse and evil wretches, who are you, bringing disrepute on the sages?

I am the Titan Viradha, this is my retreat and I roam the impenetrable forest, armed with weapons, feeding on the flesh of ascetics. This woman of lovely limbs shall become my wife and, in combat, I will drink the blood of you both, O Miscreants!”

The daughter of Janaka, Sita, hearing the cruel and arrogant speech of the wicked-hearted Viradha, filled with dread, began to tremble like a palm shaken by the wind.

Rama, seeing Viradha bearing the lovely Sita away, growing pale, said to Lakshmana:—

“O Friend, behold the daughter of Janaka, my chaste consort, an illustrious princess, reared in luxury, held fast in the arms of Viradha! Alas! Kaikeyi’s desire has been fulfilled to-day! O Lakshmana, the enthronement of her son did not suffice that designing woman, since she caused me to be banished to the forest despite the love my subjects bore me. Now she who reigns supreme in the midst of our mothers will be satisfied! That another should have laid hands on Vaidehi is the greatest of my misfortunes, worse even than the death of my sire or the loss of my kingdom, O Saumitri!”

Hearing the words of Kakutstha, Lakshmana, his eyes streaming with tears, hissing like a wounded snake, said harshly:—

“O Kakutstha, O Protector of All Beings, who art equal to Indra himself, since I am your servant, why dost you lament as though you had no defender?

“Pierced by the shaft I am about to loose in my wrath, the Titan Viradha will die and the earth drink his blood. The bitterness, I felt towards Bharata for his desiring the throne, I shall expend on Viradha, as the God who bears the thunderbolt discharges it at a mountain! With all the strength of mine arm, letting fly this sharp arrow, I shall pierce his breast! May he yield up his life and fall rolling on the earth!”