Thus afflicted, the people of the capital, their eyes streaming with tears, longed to give up their lives. Having followed Rama to the forest, they became melancholy and appeared to be almost lifeless. In their homes, with their wives and sons, they lamented bitterly. None rejoiced, none were cheerful, none decked out their children to advantage, nor did the women adorn themselves; no fire burnt on the hearth of any home, none was glad to recover the wealth he had lost and none rejoiced at a sudden increase of riches. Mothers found no delight in the return of their first-born after a long absence. Every house was filled with wailing; the husbands returning without Rama were upbraided by their wives with bitter words, as an elephant is goaded by its driver. Everywhere was heard: “Without beholding Ramacandra, of what use to us are our homes, women, wealth, sons or pleasure? There is only one who is truly virtuous and it is Lakshmana, who has followed Rama and Sita to the forest! How fortunate are those lakes and rivers filled with lotuses, whose waters, Rama, entering to bathe, does purify! Beautiful forests, rivers with verdant banks, lakes and mountains will be adorned by the presence of Shri Ramacandra. Those mountains visited by Rama, recognizing their beloved guest, will honour him with due hospitality.

“The trees also, their branches laden with flowers and buds, in which the bees are humming and murmuring, will offer their beauty to Rama. The hills will send forth flowers out of season and yield fruit and blossom in his honour. The crystal waterfalls of varied beauty will gush forth from the mountains to give delight to him. The trees, growing on the slope of the mountains, will enchant him. Where Rama is, fear and danger are banished. The heroic sons of King Dasaratha, even now, are but a little distance from us; come let us follow them. There is no happiness save in the service of the holy Feet of that illumined One. Verily he is the only Lord of the world, the Absolute, the Highest State and our sole support.”

The women of the city, overcome with grief, addressing their husbands said: “Let us follow Rama, we will serve Shri Sita, you attend on Shri Rama. Remember, Rama will preserve and maintain you in the forest, while Shri Sita will grant support to us. Of what use is life where the heart is restless and the mind bereft of purpose? If Kaikeyi rule the kingdom setting aside the moral law, what delight can we have in children and possessions; even our lives will become valueless. Will Kaikeyi be solicitous on our account, she, who has abandoned King Dasaratha and her son Shri Ramacandra, for the sake of power? We swear by our sons that while we live, we will never be slaves to Kaikeyi. Who can live happily under the rule of that shameless and evil woman who pitilessly exiled the son of the king? Without a ruler the defenceless kingdom will become a prey to every misfortune and perish on account of Kaikeyi’s evil deeds. The king will not long survive the exile of Rama and without him the kingdom will be destroyed. Our good karma being exhausted we are miserable; let us either have recourse to poison, or follow Rama, or seek some other place and live there unknown. By exiling Rama, Sita and Lakshmana, through false means we have been made subject to Bharata’s governance as beasts are lead to the slaughter. Shri Rama, a source of delight resembling the full moon, the destroyer of his foes, mighty-armed, Lakshmana’s elder brother, whose eyes are like lotuses, who speaks in gentle accents, who is brave, guileless and beloved of the people, will assuredly adorn the forest wheresoever he roams.”

The women of the city distressed by their separation from Rama, wept and mourned as do the friends of a dying man. Lamenting thus, the sun set and the night fell, no sacrificial fires were visible, nor did the brahmins, devoted to the study of the Veda, intone the sacred texts, or recite the Puranas, and in no dwelling was any lamp kindled. The city of Ayodhya, stricken and destitute, the stalls of merchandise forsaken, was bereft of beauty like the sky divested of stars. The women of Ayodhya, filled with sorrow as if their own sons or brothers had been banished, wept bitterly, Shri Ramacandra being dearer to them than their own children. In the city, no songs or music was heard, nor was there dancing or any sign of rejoicing. The merchant ceased to expose their merchandise and sat sunk in dejection. Thus Ayodhya, without joy or activity, appeared as desolate as an ocean without water.