Hearing the words of that Sovereign of the Titans, the wise and eloquent Marica answered him, saying:—

“O King, those who have recourse to flattery are easy to find, but rare are those who are willing to listen to that speech which is severe yet salutory. Assuredly you dost not know Rama and art not conversant with his great qualities, which equal those of Mahendra and Varuna.

“You are thoughtless and your spies are incompetent; how canst you dwell in security with your titans, O Friend? Is not Rama in his wrath able to rid the world of titans? Will not the daughter of Janaka prove to be that which will determine your death? Will not Sita become the cause of a great catastrophe?

“Will not the city of Lanka perish with you and your titans, since it has you who followest the dictates of your passions, who art a slave to your senses and who knowest no restraint, as its lord? An unprincipled monarch, such as you, is the slave of his desires and in his perversity heeds only evil counsels, thus placing his subjects and his kingdom in jeopardy.

“Rama has neither been disowned by his sire, nor is he unfaithful to his duty, nor is he avaricious nor wicked, nor the obloquy of the warrior caste. The son of Kaushalya is neither void of loyalty nor of other virtues, nor is he given to anger, nor does he seek to harm others. Knowing his father to be deceived by Kaikeyi, yet filled with filial devotion he said ‘I will redeem his pledge’ and went into exile to the forest. To please Kaikeyi and his father Dasaratha, he renounced his throne and prerogatives in order to enter the Dandaka Forest. Rama is neither passionate nor is he an ignorant man, whose senses are unsubdued; what has been related to you is false and should never have been uttered. Rama is duty personified; he is virtuous, and this great hero is the Lord of the World, as Indra is the Chief of the Gods. By virtue of her chastity and her devotion, Vaidehi protects Rama as Prabha the Sun, how canst you think of bearing her away by force? Do not enter the inextinguishable fire of Rama, who on the battlefield employs his shafts as flames and his bow as fuel. No matter how great thine anger, it behoves you not to approach that invincible warrior, bearing his bow, his countenance inflamed with ire, furnished with every weapon, the Destroyer of his Foes!

“Unless you are willing to forfeit your kingdom, thine happiness and life itself, that is dear to all, do not approach Rama, who resembles Antaka himself. How canst you bear away the daughter of Janaka from the forest, who is protected by Rama’s bow of immeasurable power? The beloved spouse of that Lion among Men, whose chest is broad, is dearer to him than his own life, and she is wholly devoted to him. The Princess of Mithila of slender waist will never be torn from the arms of that great warrior who resembles a flame in a lit brazier.

“Why enter upon such a vain endeavour, O Great King? Should Rama single you out on the battlefield, all would be over with you. Since it concerns your life, your fortune and your kingdom, heretofore invincible, take counsel with your ministers with Bibishana at their head. In honour reflect and weigh carefully the merits and demerits, gain and loss, of this matter. Compare your valour with that of Raghava! Consider what is to thine advantage and then do what you think right. It does not appear fitting to me, that you should meet the son of the King of Koshala on the battlefield. I counsel you for thine own good, O King of the Night Rangers!”