“O Long-armed Rama, formerly I was filled with unimaginable energy and courage; my beauty was famed throughout the Three Worlds and equal to the sun, the moon and Indra himself. Assuming a terrible form, I became an object of fear to all and struck terror into the hearts of the ascetics living in the forest.

“O Rama, on a certain occasion I incurred the wrath of a great Rishi named Sthulashira, whom I tormented in this loathsome shape, whilst he was gathering wild fruits. Fixing his gaze on me, he pronounced a terrible curse, saying:—‘Do you retain for ever this fearful form, assumed by you in order to harm others!’

“Appealing to that provoked ascetic to rescind his curse, he took compassion on me and said: ‘When Rama cremates you in the lonely forest, having severed both thine arms, you shalt regain your great and wonderful form.’

“O Lakshmana, know that I am really the son of Danu, who was extremely handsome to look upon; my present appearance is due to a curse pronounced by Indra on the field of battle.

“By rigorous penances I gained the goodwill of Brahma, and he granted me the boon of longevity. Thereafter I was filled with pride and, thinking ‘What can Indra do to me now’, I challenged him to combat, whereupon he hurled his mace of a hundred edges at me. By the force of this weapon, my thighs and head were thrust into my body; I prayed to him to end my life, but he, saying: ‘May the words of Brahma prove true compelled me to go on living. Then I addressed Mahendra, saying:—‘How shall I live without food, since you have thrust my head and thighs into my body?’

“Thereat, Indra caused my arms to extend over four miles and placed a mouth with sharp teeth in my belly. Ever since, stretching out my arms, I wander in the forest and seize hold of lions, tigers and deer and put them into my mouth. Then Indra said to me: ‘When Rama and Lakshmana cut off thine arms, you shalt attain heaven’.

“Since then, O Great One, I have laid hold on every living being I have found in the forest and have been awaiting Rama to sever my arms; anticipating this, I have waited for death. Now, O Lord, you have come, be you blessed 1 None but you can put an end to my life; the words of the great Rishi have proved true, O Illustrious One. I will put my counsel at your service, O Bull among Men, and, when I have received the consecration of fire, will form a pact of friendship with you both.”

At these words of Danu, Rama, in the hearing of Lakshmana, answered him, saying:—

“Ravana has borne away mine illustrious consort, Sita, whilst I and my brother were absent from the hermitage. I am conversant only with the name of that titan but not with his form, nor are we acquainted with his strength, nor where he dwells. Helpless and distressed, we wander here and there in the forest; it behoves you to show your compassion to us. After gathering all the branches that are dry and have been broken down by elephants and digging a large pit, we will cremate you at the time indicated by you. Do you tell us who has carried Sita away and where she is to be found. Render us this great service, if you are acquainted with the truth.”

Thus addressed by Rama, Danu, skilled in speech, answered Raghava, saying:—“I am not possessed of divine foresight, neither am I acquainted with the Princess Sita, but being cremated by you, resuming my natural form, I shall be able to point out one to you, who will know what has become of her. Without being consumed by fire, I am unable to tell you who is acquainted with that titan who has carried Sita away. Through a curse, my foresight has been destroyed, O Raghava, and through mine own fault I have become an object of loathing to the whole world, but before the sun with his tired steeds withdraws behind the western horizon cast me into the pit, O Rama, and cremate me according to the traditional rites.

“Cremated by you with due ceremonial, O Joy of the House of Raghu, I shall tell you who is acquainted with that titan. It is for you to seal a pact of friendship with him according to the law. O Raghava, that swift-footed hero will lend you his assistance.

“For one reason or another, he has traversed the Three Worlds and there is nothing in the Universe that is not known to him.”