Arjuna, the brave warrior with the white horses, was very angry.  He’d heard something from his brother, Yudhishthira, the king.  Arjuna pulled out his sword, ready to fight!

Krishna, Arjuna’s wise friend, stopped him. "Arjuna," he said, "Why are you so angry? There’s no one to fight!  The battle is over, and Yudhishthira is safe. Why are you so upset?"

Arjuna grumbled, “Someone told me to give my special bow, Gandiva, to someone else.  Yudhishthira said that! It’s against my promise. I have to kill him!"

Krishna shook his head. "Arjuna," he said, "That's not right! Killing someone isn't always the answer.  There are rules about what's right and wrong. Sometimes even telling a little lie is okay if it saves someone's life or prevents a really bad thing from happening."

Krishna told Arjuna two stories.  First, about a hunter named Valaka. Valaka killed a blind animal, even though he didn't mean to hurt anyone.  He actually went to heaven because he helped someone. Then, he told a story about a wise man named Kausika.  Kausika always told the truth, but because of that truth, some people were killed, and Kausika was punished.

Krishna explained, "Sometimes, even doing a bad thing can be okay if it stops something worse.  And sometimes, telling the truth can cause harm."

Arjuna was confused.  He asked Krishna what to do about his promise to kill Yudhishthira.  Krishna said, "Yudhishthira was hurt and upset from the battle. He didn’t mean to upset you. He said those words because he wanted you to defeat Karna, a very dangerous enemy."

Krishna had an idea! "Arjuna, instead of killing your brother, just show him a little disrespect. You always call him ‘Your Honour.’  Just call him ‘you’ instead!  It will be like a small death, without actually killing him, and it will fulfill your promise!"

Arjuna liked this idea.  It let him keep his promise without hurting his brother. He would show Yudhishthira a tiny bit of disrespect, then apologize. This way, he could still fight Karna and win the war.  Arjuna thanked Krishna for his wise advice.
