Once upon a time, during a big battle, two brave warriors fought.  Duryodhana, a strong king, and Dhrishtadyumna, a brave prince, shot many, many arrows at each other.  They shot so many arrows it looked like rain!

Duryodhana hit Dhrishtadyumna with five arrows, then seven more!  But Dhrishtadyumna was super strong and hit Duryodhana back with seventy arrows!

Duryodhana's brothers saw this and rushed to help.  Dhrishtadyumna fought bravely, dodging and weaving through all the arrows.

Meanwhile, another fight started! Shikhandi and some friends fought against two Kuru warriors, Kritavarma and Kripa.  It was a super fierce battle; everyone fought really hard!

Shalya, another king, shot lots of arrows at the Pandavas, Satyaki and Bhima.  He was so strong! He even fought Nakula and Sahadeva, who were amazing fighters themselves.  The Pandavas were getting hurt.

Nakula saw his cousin, King Yudhishthira, in trouble.  He quickly went to help! Nakula threw ten sharp, shiny arrows at Shalya.  Shalya fought back, hitting Nakula with many arrows too.

Then, Yudhishthira, Bhima, Satyaki, and Sahadeva all attacked Shalya!  Shalya was a great warrior. He fought back bravely, hitting them with lots of arrows.  He even broke Nakula's bow!

Shalya was so strong that even all the Pandavas together couldn't easily defeat him. He hit Yudhishthira with three arrows, Bhima with seven, Satyaki with one hundred, and Sahadeva with three!

Satyaki, a very brave warrior, saw his friends getting hurt.  He rushed to fight Shalya! Their battle was amazing, like two angry elephants crashing together!

Satyaki and Shalya kept shooting arrows at each other.  The arrows flew everywhere, making the sky dark and the ground look like a rain of arrows!  It was a very scary and exciting fight!

Shalya was incredibly strong. He fought many warriors all by himself! The arrows flying from his bow were like a storm! His chariot zoomed around, making the earth shake.  It was a truly amazing and frightening battle!
