Long ago, in the land of Bharat, a wise old man named Bhishma taught a king about fairness and right actions.  He said, "A good king must help poor priests who need money for their important ceremonies. These priests know lots of sacred stories and need to be supported."

Bhishma explained that rich priests only needed a small gift. If a priest had done something wrong, he should get plain food, but away from the holy place.  "Priests are very important," Bhishma said. "They are like the sacred stories themselves! They always try to do good things, so the king should give them gifts."

If a priest needed just a little more money to finish a ceremony, Bhishma said the king should help. He could take a little money from a rich person who didn't help the priests.  Only priests can lead the ceremonies; other people can't.

Bhishma also said that if a very poor priest was so hungry he hadn't eaten for days, he could take a little food from anyone's field or garden, but he should tell the king afterwards.  A good king wouldn't punish the priest because the king should make sure everyone has enough to eat.

Bhishma said a king should take good care of the priests, like a father takes care of his children.  There are many ways to be good, and if someone can't do one thing, they can do another.  But if someone *could* do the best thing, and didn't, that's not good.

A priest should never boast about how smart or strong they are. The king should figure that out himself. Priests are very wise and powerful, so they should always be treated with respect.  Never be mean to a priest.

Only a wise priest who knows all the sacred stories should lead ceremonies. If someone else does it, bad things might happen.  Always be respectful during ceremonies.  If you start a ceremony, you must give gifts afterwards.  Not giving gifts is bad luck.

Bhishma talked about many other things.  He said some things were very, very bad, like hurting a priest or drinking too much alcohol. There are ways to become good again after doing something wrong, but these very bad actions are extremely difficult to fix.  Even lying is not always bad— there are some exceptions.

He explained that everyone should be kind and helpful.  Following the rules and being good afterwards can help fix mistakes, but it is much better to be good all along. A king who follows these rules will be a fair and kind king.
