Once upon a time, in a great battle, a mighty warrior named Shalya fought bravely. But then, he fell!  When Shalya died, the King's army got scared. They were like lost sailors on a stormy sea, without a boat to save them.  They were all mixed up and afraid, like sheep without a shepherd.  Some ran away on horses, some on elephants, some in chariots – even the brave soldiers were running!  Thousands of elephants, as big as mountains, stampeded!

The Pandavas, seeing this, chased them.  Arrows flew, elephants trumpeted, and brave warriors shouted. The Pandavas were very happy. They knew they were winning! They said, "King Yudhishthira, who is always honest, has won! Duryodhana has lost everything! His father, Dhritarashtra, will be very sad when he hears about his sons.  He will be sorry he didn't listen to good advice. He will have to serve the Pandavas!  Today, everyone will see how strong Bhima is, just like Indra, the king of the gods, defeated Vali."  They knew Bhima was the only one strong enough to defeat the terrible Duhshasana.

The Pandavas were sure they would win because they had Arjuna, the greatest archer;  Bhima, the strongest warrior; and Krishna, their wise protector, on their side. They knew they were fighting for what was right.

Duryodhana, though, was brave.  He saw his army running away.  He told his driver, "My enemy Arjuna is right there, but I won't run.  Take me to the back of the army. If I stand firm, my soldiers will come back to fight!"

Even though most of his soldiers ran, 21,000 brave foot soldiers stayed to fight! Bhima, with his giant club, fought like a storm, defeating them all.  The ground was covered with the fallen soldiers.

Even though the Pandavas were winning, Duryodhana didn't give up. He told his remaining soldiers, "Don't run!  Fighting bravely is the best way to die.  If we win, we'll be happy. If we die, we'll go to heaven! We must fight!"  And so, the battle raged on!  Arjuna and his friends fought bravely against Duryodhana's brave remaining soldiers. The end of the battle was still far away!
