Once upon a time, a strong warrior named Rama got very angry.  His father had died, so Rama used his big axe to fight and defeat a mean king with a thousand arms!  He was so strong, he almost conquered the whole world!  He fought so many battles, he almost wiped out all the warrior kings!

Because of this, there weren't many warrior kings left.  The warrior queens needed help raising children.  So they asked wise men, called Brahmins, to help.  The babies still belonged to the warrior queens' husbands, even though the Brahmins helped raise them.  This is how the warrior kings came back.

There's another story!  A wise man named Utathya loved his wife, Mamata. Utathya's brother, Vrihaspati, was also very important.  Vrihaspati wanted to be with Mamata, but she said, "No! I'm already carrying Utathya's baby! This baby is already learning all sorts of wise things inside me." But Vrihaspati didn't listen. He tried to be with Mamata anyway.

The baby in Mamata's tummy spoke up!  "Stop! There's no room for two babies!"  But Vrihaspati was too excited and didn't stop. The baby's clever actions stopped Vrihaspati, and his seed fell on the ground.  Vrihaspati was angry. He cursed the baby to be blind!  The baby was named Dirghatamas, which means "always dark."

Even though Dirghatamas was blind, he was very smart. He married a nice woman named Pradweshi and had many sons. But his sons were greedy and foolish. They didn't like their father. They even got angry at him.

Pradweshi got angry, too. She told Dirghatamas, "You're blind and can't take care of me or our children! I won't help you anymore!" Dirghatamas was sad. He said, "From now on, every woman should only be with one husband for her whole life. If she isn't, she is bad."

Pradweshi and her sons were furious! They tied Dirghatamas to a raft and pushed him into a river! The raft floated along, and eventually, a kind king named Vali found him. Vali asked Dirghatamas to help him have children. But Vali's queen was mean.  She wouldn't go to Dirghatamas, she sent her servant instead!  Dirghatamas had many children with her.

Later, Vali asked if these kids were his.  Dirghatamas told him they were his.  Then, Vali asked Dirghatamas to help his queen have children. Dirghatamas touched her, and she had five children, and those children’s names became the names of the places they ruled!

So, many strong warriors and kings came from different families, thanks to these stories!  Just like these people, we can all learn important lessons from the past.
