Once upon a time, after Draupadi chose her husbands, news spread quickly.  Secret spies told the kings who’d been there that Draupadi had married the Pandava brothers!  Everyone learned that Arjuna, the best archer ever, had bent the impossible bow.  They also heard about Bhima, who was so strong he’d knocked King Salya to the ground and scared everyone with a giant tree he’d pulled up!

The kings were amazed. They’d heard the Pandavas were thought to be dead!  They thought the Pandavas had been burned alive in a house fire! The kings were shocked. They whispered, "Shame on Bhishma and Dhritarashtra!"

After the wedding, all the kings went home.  Duryodhana was very sad. Draupadi hadn't chosen him! He went home with his brothers, Karna, and others, feeling terrible.

Duhsasana said quietly, "Arjuna was disguised as a priest! That's why nobody knew who he was.  It was fate, brother. Our hard work was for nothing! The Pandavas are still alive!" They blamed Purochana for not killing the Pandavas.

When Vidura heard that the Pandavas were alive and had won Draupadi, he was so happy! He went to see the blind King Dhritarashtra and said, "King, good luck is with the Kurus!"

The King, who was blind, thought Duryodhana had married Draupadi! He was overjoyed and ordered fancy jewelry made for her. He wanted Duryodhana and Draupadi to come to the palace.

Vidura had to tell him the truth: Draupadi had married the Pandavas, and they were alive and well! They’d made friends with King Drupada and his powerful army.

Dhritarashtra said, “The Pandavas are like my own sons!  I love them even more now! They have powerful friends.  Any king would want Drupada as an ally!”

Vidura said, "May you always think this way, King!"  Then he went home.

Later, Duryodhana, Karna, and others spoke to Dhritarashtra secretly.  "We can't say anything bad in front of Vidura," they said.  "But Father, why are you so happy about the Pandavas' success? You should be trying to stop them from getting stronger. We need a plan, Father, before they defeat us all!"
