King Dhritarashtra asked his advisor, Sanjaya, "Sanjaya, tell me about the great battle!  How did Karna, the brave warrior, fight his way through the Pandavas' army and hurt King Yudhishthira?  Which brave Pandava warriors fought against him?"

Sanjaya said, "King, Karna charged into the Pandavas' army like a strong storm! The Pancala soldiers, eager to win, fought back bravely.  The battle was loud!  Thousands of horns blew, drums beat, and everyone shouted. It was so loud, the whole earth shook! Even animals were scared.

Karna was very angry. He threw his weapons everywhere, like the god Indra throwing thunderbolts! He quickly defeated many Pancala soldiers.  Many, many Pancala soldiers fell. Then, more Pancala soldiers surrounded him. Karna fought them all off.  He killed five brave Pancala warriors: Bhanudeva, Citrasena, Senavindu, Tapana, and Surasena.

Karna's sons, Sushena and Satyasena, fought bravely beside their father.  His oldest son, Vrishasena, protected him from behind.  Then, many Pandava heroes attacked Karna!  There was Dhrishtadyumna, Satyaki, the five sons of Draupadi, Bhima, Janamejaya, Shikhandi, Nakula, Sahadeva, and many more. They rained down arrows like a big storm!

Karna's sons fought back to protect their father. Sushena broke Bhima's bow and hit Bhima with many arrows!  Bhima, very angry, broke Sushena's bow and hit him back with even more arrows! Bhima also killed another of Karna's sons, Bhanusena.  Bhima then fought Kripa and Hridika’s son.  He even hit Duhshasana and Shakuni with arrows!

Sushena tried to help his father. He hit Nakula with arrows. Nakula fought back hard.  They kept fighting! Satyaki fought against Vrishasena and broke his bow and hit his horses. Vrishasena was knocked down, but he got back up and kept fighting.  Duhshasana helped Vrishasena get a new chariot.  Then, Vrishasena attacked many Pandavas, including King Yudhishthira!

Many brave warriors fought on both sides. Karna was a super-fast warrior. He was so quick, people couldn't even see him shoot his arrows – they just saw his enemies fall! The sky was full of flying arrows! Karna shot many more arrows than his enemies shot at him. Finally, the Pandava warriors made a path for him to escape.  Karna fought his way to King Yudhishthira and hit him with arrows. Other Pandava warriors quickly rushed to protect the King! The battle was loud and fierce, with brave warriors fighting for both sides."
