Arjuna was scared.  He didn't want to fight!  He asked Krishna, "If you say being good is better than fighting, why are you making me fight this terrible war?"

Krishna smiled. "Arjuna," he said, "there are two ways to be good. One is through knowing, and the other is through doing.  You can't just stop doing things and become good.  Everyone does things! Even sleeping is doing something!

Some people pretend to be good but still think about bad things. That's not really being good.  The best way is to do your work, but not get caught up in it. Don't worry about the results. Just do your best."

"Long ago," Krishna continued, "I created people and a special way to be good – giving thanks through sharing! This sharing keeps everyone happy. People share, the gods are happy, and the gods help people.  It's like a circle of kindness.  If you only take and don't give back, you're being selfish.  Sharing is the best way to be good."

"Everything comes from the earth and the sun. Sharing our work and food comes from following the ancient rules and it gives thanks to the higher powers.  If you don't share and just think about yourself, you're missing the point.  You're living a meaningless life. The truly happy person is happy within themselves; they don't need anything from others."

"Even great kings like Janaka did their work without being attached to the results.  You should do the same. I do my work too, even though I don't need to! If I didn't, the world would fall apart. It’s important to do your duty.  Even if you're not perfect, it's better than not trying at all. People follow the example of great people.  You should be a good example, Arjun!"

Arjuna still felt confused.  "Krishna," he said, "what makes someone do bad things, even if they don't want to?"

Krishna answered, "It's desire and anger. They're like a fire that burns up everything good.  Desire is like smoke that covers up your good sense.  It's like dust on a mirror, hiding the truth.  Your senses, your mind and understanding, all get trapped by desire.  To be good, you need to control your senses, and stop that fire of desire from burning. By controlling your senses, you can conquer your bad thoughts and become a better person."
