Once upon a time, long, long ago, the gods were having a big party in the Naimisha forest.  Yama, the god of death, was helping out, but he wasn't taking anyone's life. Because of this, lots and lots of people were born, but no one died!

The other gods got worried.  "There are too many people!" they cried to the Great Creator.  "Help us!"

The Creator chuckled. "Don't worry, you're all immortal," he said.  "But," he added, "once Yama finishes helping at the party, people will start dying again."

Then, the gods saw something amazing – a golden lotus floating down a river!  Indra, the king of the gods, followed the river to find out where it came from. He found a beautiful woman crying. Her tears were turning into the golden lotuses!

Indra asked the woman why she was sad.  She said, "Come with me, and you'll see."  Indra followed her to a mountaintop.  There, he saw a handsome man playing a game.  It was Mahadeva, the greatest god of all!

Indra, feeling very important, shouted, "I am the king of the universe!"  Mahadeva just smiled.  His smile made Indra freeze – he couldn't move!

Mahadeva told the woman to bring Indra closer.  He touched Indra, and the king of the gods fell to the ground!  Mahadeva showed Indra a cave with four other frozen gods inside.

"You were once like them," Mahadeva said.  "Enter the cave and learn humility."  Indra was scared. He was sent to the cave as punishment.  Mahadeva told him and the other gods that they would be reborn as humans.  They would have to work hard and fight many battles, before they could return to their glorious lives as gods.

One of the gods would be reborn as Arjuna, the bravest of the Pandava brothers.  The woman, the beautiful goddess Sri, would be reborn as Draupadi, the wife of all five Pandava brothers.

Vyasa, a wise man, showed King Drupada a magical vision. The king saw the Pandavas in their glorious heavenly forms! He also saw Draupadi's true form – a goddess, whose beauty was beyond compare!

Vyasa explained that Draupadi had been a princess who prayed to become the wife of a perfect husband.  The gods granted her wish in an unusual way – she would marry five perfect husbands.  They were the five gods, reborn as the Pandava brothers!
