King Dhritarashtra asked his friend Sanjaya, "Sanjaya, tell me and all these kings what Arjuna, the great warrior, said."

Sanjaya said, "Arjuna, with Yudhishthira's permission, spoke bravely to me. He said, 'Tell Duryodhana, and all the Kauravas, and even that mean, foolish, soon-to-die man,  that I'm ready to fight! Tell the kings who want to fight us Pandavas, that they should listen closely to my words!'  The Pandavas and their friends listened carefully to Arjuna, just like gods listen to their leader Indra.

Arjuna said, 'If Duryodhana doesn't give up his kingdom to King Yudhishthira, then he and his brothers will face the consequences of their bad actions! They want to fight Bhima, me, and all our powerful friends.  If Duryodhana wants war, let him have it!  Let him lie on the hard ground, a worse bed than Yudhishthira had during our exile.

'Let Duryodhana's followers join us.  Yudhishthira is kind, wise, and brave. He’s forgiven many wrongs. But when he’s angry, he’ll be like a huge fire, burning the Kaurava army!

'When Duryodhana sees Bhima, angry and ready to fight with his mighty club, he'll be sorry! He'll regret this war when he sees Bhima smashing elephants and destroying the enemy army like the god of death.  He’ll regret it when he sees Nakula, a great archer, raining arrows down on his soldiers.

'He’ll regret it when he sees Draupadi's five sons, brave and strong, fighting without fear.  He’ll regret it when he sees Sahadeva, another great warrior, making kings fall with his arrows.

'He'll regret it when he sees Abhimanyu, a young warrior as skilled as Krishna, fighting like a storm.  He’ll regret it when he sees our strong allies, Virata and Drupada, attacking his army.

'He’ll definitely regret it when Bhishma, the greatest Kaurava warrior, is defeated by Sikhandin.  He'll regret it when he sees Dhristadyumna, our best warrior, lead the fight.  And he'll regret it when he sees Satyaki, the great warrior, fighting for us!

'Satyaki is so strong; even the gods wouldn’t want to fight him. When Duryodhana sees my golden chariot, pulled by white horses, and hears the sound of my powerful bow, Gandiva, he will really regret this. He'll see me shooting arrows like lightning, destroying his army.

'I will defeat Duryodhana and all his brothers and friends. The gods themselves are on our side. A wise man told me that Krishna would be with me in this battle. Krishna is incredibly powerful; even the gods couldn't defeat him!  He has won many battles and defeated powerful enemies!  No one is strong enough to win against him!

'We’ve been treated badly. We had to live in the forest for twelve years and hide for another year. How can Duryodhana and his brothers be happy while we still live?  If he fights, he’ll lose. If he doesn’t fight, maybe he can live, but there will still be consequences for all the bad things he's done.'

'My bow Gandiva is ready!  My arrows are eager to fly!  Even the animals know war is coming! Duryodhana is foolish to fight us. But I will listen to Bhishma, Kripa, and Drona and let them have peace if they choose it,' Arjuna finished.

