After the big battle, Gandhari looked at the dead kings.  She saw the Kamboja king, lying in the dirt instead of on his comfy blankets! His wife cried, holding his blood-soaked arms – arms that used to be covered in sweet-smelling paste.  "My love, what will I do without you?" she sobbed.

Nearby, many beautiful ladies were crying too. They were tired and hot, but they were still very pretty, like flowers even in the sun.  Gandhari saw the Kalinga king and the Magadha king, both dead. The Magadha ladies were crying sadly, their pretty jewelry scattered on the ground.  They were used to sleeping on soft beds, not the hard earth.

Then she saw the Kosala king, Brihadbala. His wives were pulling arrows from his body, screaming and fainting. Their faces were pale and tired, like wilted flowers.  Nearby,  Dhrishtadyumna's brave sons, still wearing their pretty gold necklaces, lay dead. They were like little bugs caught in a fire – a fire made of Drona's chariot, his bow, and his arrows.

Five brave Kekaya brothers, also covered in gold, were dead too.  King Drupada, like a huge elephant defeated by a strong lion, was also among the dead. His white umbrella shone like the moon.  His family carried his burning body away.

Gandhari saw Dhrishtaketu, the brave Cedi king,  dead. His wives held his body close, crying.  Even his son, who was always near his father, lay dead beside him.  Lakshmana, another brave warrior, lay dead next to his father, Duryodhana. Two Avanti brothers, Vinda and Anuvinda, lay dead like trees blown down in a storm.

Gandhari said, "Even the strongest warriors are defeated by fate. My sons are all gone.  You, Krishna, could have stopped the war, but you didn't. You had the power."

Very angry, Gandhari cursed Krishna: "Because you didn't stop the fighting, you will also lose your family.  In thirty-six years, you will die a terrible death, and your loved ones will cry just as these women are crying now."

Krishna smiled sadly. He said, "Only I can destroy the Vrishnis (Krishna's clan).  Your curse helps me do this."  The Pandavas were shocked.  They knew that soon, many more would die.
