Yudhishthira, a king, asked his wise grandfather, Bhishma, a very important question: "Grandpa, who made the whole world – the animals, the plants, the oceans, the mountains, everything?  What happens to everything when the world ends? Where do people go when they die?"

Bhishma said, "A long time ago, a wise man named Bharadwaja asked the same question of the great Rishi Bhrigu.  Bhrigu was very, very wise and powerful!"

Bharadwaja asked Bhrigu, "Who made the world?  How did everything get started? Why are there different kinds of people? What makes something good or bad? What happens to us when we die?"

Bhrigu answered, "There is a great, powerful being called Manasa.  Manasa has always existed and will always exist.  Manasa is so powerful that nothing can hurt Manasa.  Manasa is like a magical beginning to everything.  Manasa first created another being called Mahat. Mahat created consciousness, and then space.  From space came water, then fire and wind. Earth was made from fire and wind.  Manasa also created a beautiful lotus flower. From this lotus, Brahman was born."

Bhrigu explained that Brahman is like the energy that makes up everything.  "The mountains are Brahman’s bones, the earth is Brahman’s body, the oceans are Brahman’s blood, and the wind is Brahman’s breath!"  He said Brahman is everywhere and that it’s hard to understand completely.


Bharadwaja then asked, "How big is the sky, the earth, and everything?"

Bhrigu said, "The sky is HUGE!  It goes on forever. Even the sun and moon can't see the end of it.  There are many, many worlds, one above the other.  Below the earth, there are more worlds too, with water, darkness, and more! It’s impossible to know how big everything really is!”

Bharadwaja was still curious. He asked, "If Brahman came from the lotus, shouldn't the lotus be the first thing?"

Bhrigu explained, "The Earth is like the lotus flower.  It was made to be a place for Brahman. The tall mountain Sumeru is like the stem of the lotus flower.  From there, Brahman created all the worlds!"
