Once upon a time, there was a huge battle in the Mahabharata war.  King Dhritarashtra asked his advisor Sanjaya to tell him what was happening.

Sanjaya said, "At noon, a big fight started between Bhishma, a great warrior, and the Pandavas' army.  Bhishma, who was very strong, shot lots and lots of arrows. He was like a strong bull, pushing down the Pandavas' soldiers!

Dhrishtadyumna, Sikhandin, Virata, and Drupada fought back hard.  They shot many arrows at Bhishma. Bhishma fought back too, and he hurt them with his arrows. The brave warriors got very angry, like snakes when someone steps on them.

Sikhandin shot many arrows at Bhishma, but Bhishma didn't fight back because Sikhandin looked like a woman. Then Dhrishtadyumna, Drupada, and Virata also shot lots of arrows at Bhishma. Bhishma was hurt and bleeding, but he still looked strong!

Bhishma fought back, shooting arrows at them. He even broke Drupada's bow!  But Drupada got a new bow and kept fighting.  Draupadi’s sons, the Kaikeya brothers, and Satyaki rushed to help.  King Dhritarashtra’s army also tried to protect Bhishma.

Then a HUGE battle happened!  Soldiers fought on chariots, elephants, and horses.  Lots of chariots crashed, and soldiers fell.  Brave warriors, who were rich and smart, fought hard, even when their chariots were broken! Elephants ran wild, and horses galloped everywhere. The battlefield was a terrible mess!  It was like a river of blood, with broken bows, hair, and dead bodies.  Brave warriors tried to cross this bloody river to fight.

Many soldiers cried, "This is all Duryodhana’s fault!  He made Dhritarashtra jealous of the Pandavas." They said Dhritarashtra should have listened to his friends.

Duryodhana told his generals, Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, and Salya, "Fight harder! Don't be slow!"  The battle went on and on. Sanjaya said to Dhritarashtra, “This awful battle is because of the dice game, and it’s causing so much death.  No one cares if they live or die. This terrible thing is happening because of your bad choices, or maybe it’s just fate.”
