Once upon a time, during a great battle, there was a brave warrior named Yuyutsu. He was fighting a warrior named Uluka.  Uluka shouted, "Wait!" but Yuyutsu shot a super-fast arrow! It hit Uluka like a thunderbolt!

Uluka was angry. He shot an arrow and broke Yuyutsu’s bow! Then he hit Yuyutsu with another arrow.

Yuyutsu got a new bow.  He shot sixty arrows at Uluka! Then he hit Uluka’s chariot driver.  He shot Uluka again!

Uluka got mad. He shot twenty golden arrows at Yuyutsu! Then he cut Yuyutsu’s fancy golden flag! The flag fell to the ground.

Yuyutsu got even angrier! He shot five arrows right into Uluka's chest!  Uluka shot an arrow and cut off Yuyutsu’s chariot driver's head! Then he killed Yuyutsu's horses and shot him five more times.  Poor Yuyutsu had to jump to a new chariot!

After beating Yuyutsu, Uluka went to fight other soldiers.  Another brave warrior, Srutakarman, was very quick! In the blink of an eye, he destroyed another warrior's chariot and horses!

The other warrior, Satanika, threw a big club!  BANG! It smashed Srutakarman’s chariot to pieces! Both warriors had no chariots left and glared at each other before running away to get new ones.

Another exciting fight happened between Shakuni and Sutasoma! Shakuni shot lots of arrows at Sutasoma, but Sutasoma didn’t even flinch!  He showered Shakuni with thousands of arrows!

Shakuni was a great warrior, though. He cut all of Sutasoma’s arrows with his own arrows. Then he shot Sutasoma three times!  He also cut off Sutasoma’s chariot, horses, and flag!  Everyone cheered!

Sutasoma jumped off his broken chariot. He grabbed a new bow and shot so many arrows at Shakuni, it looked like a swarm of locusts! Shakuni was amazing; he shot his own arrows to break Sutasoma's arrows!  Everyone was amazed that Sutasoma was fighting from the ground while Shakuni was in his chariot!

Shakuni, still in his chariot, was so strong he broke Sutasoma’s bow and arrows! Sutasoma then pulled out a shiny blue sword. He spun and leaped, showing off amazing sword skills! He even cut down Shakuni’s arrows with his sword!

Shakuni finally cut Sutasoma's sword in half with an arrow!  Sutasoma threw the broken piece of his sword; it hit Shakuni's bow and broke it! Sutasoma ran to a new chariot. He got another bow and kept fighting.  He bravely fought the Pandava army, defeating lots of soldiers!  It was a truly amazing battle!
