King Dhritarashtra asked his advisor Sanjaya, "Sanjaya, what happened after Arjuna killed the king of Sindhu?"

Sanjaya answered, "When Arjuna killed the Sindhu king, Kripa got very angry. He shot many arrows at Arjuna!  Drona's son, Ashwatthaman, also attacked Arjuna.  Both Kripa and Ashwatthaman were great warriors. They showered Arjuna with arrows!"

Arjuna was hurt, but he didn't want to hurt his teachers, Kripa and Drona.  He fought back gently, but his arrows were so many and so strong that they still hurt Kripa and Ashwatthaman a lot. Kripa was so weak he fainted on his chariot. His driver took him away from the battle.  Ashwatthaman, scared, ran away too.

Arjuna felt very sad. He cried. He said, "A wise man named Vidura warned my uncle, Dhritarashtra, long ago that his son, Duryodhana, would bring great trouble.  Now, because of Duryodhana, I've hurt my teacher, Kripa! This is wrong! I shouldn't have fought with my teacher! He's a wise man, like my other teacher Drona, and my friend. I'm a terrible warrior to do this!"

While Arjuna was sad, Karna, another warrior, saw that the king of Sindhu was dead. He rushed toward Arjuna! But before he could fight Arjuna, Satyaki and two other brave warriors jumped in front of Arjuna to protect him.

Arjuna told his friend Krishna, "Karna is coming!  Let Satyaki fight him. Karna has a powerful weapon, and it’s best if he doesn’t use it against me." Krishna agreed.

Dhritarashtra then asked, "Sanjaya, tell me about the fight between Karna and Satyaki after Bhurisravas and the Sindhu king died. Satyaki didn't have a chariot, so how did he fight?"

Sanjaya said, "Krishna knew Satyaki might lose without a chariot, so he prepared a chariot for him in advance.  When Karna was ready to fight, Krishna blew his conch shell. Daruka, Krishna's charioteer, quickly brought the chariot to Satyaki.  Satyaki, now on a beautiful chariot, fought Karna. It was an amazing battle! Everyone stopped fighting to watch.  Even the gods watched from the sky!

Karna was very angry because Satyaki had killed one of his friends.  He fought Satyaki fiercely. Satyaki was strong, too, and he fought back.  He even broke Karna's chariot!  He also killed Karna's driver and horses. Karna's other friends helped him escape.  After that, many other great warriors fought, but Satyaki fought bravely and didn’t lose.  He is a very strong warrior.

Dhritarashtra asked, "Did Satyaki get another chariot after his fight with Karna?"

Sanjaya said, "Yes!  A brand new chariot, even better than the last, was given to Satyaki. He went back to fight!  King Dhritarashtra, your armies have lost many brave warriors, thirty-one of your sons were killed by Bhima alone! Many others died, too. Your bad decisions caused all this."
