Once upon a time, the Pandava brothers – Yudhishthira, Bhima, Arjuna, Nakula, and Sahadeva – lived in a safe forest with Krishna and their wise teacher, Dhaumya.  Many holy men came to visit them.

One holy man said, "Arjuna's best friend, the strong and wise Krishna, is coming! He wants to see you."  And just then, whoosh! Krishna arrived in his chariot, pulled by amazing horses, with his wife Satyabhama.  

Krishna was so happy to see them! He bowed to Yudhishthira and Bhima. He greeted Dhaumya, and hugged Arjuna. He also hugged Draupadi, the Pandavas' wife.  Everyone was thrilled to see each other.

Arjuna told Krishna all about their adventures in the forest. He asked about Subhadra and their son, Abhimanyu. Krishna praised Yudhishthira for being a good and honest king, saying, "Being good is more important than being a king!" He promised to help the Pandavas get back their kingdom.  He also told them about his powerful army that was ready to fight for them.

While they talked, a very old, very holy man named Markandeya appeared.  He looked young, even though he had lived for thousands of years!  Everyone bowed to him.

Krishna asked Markandeya to tell them some stories.  Yudhishthira then asked a big question:  "If God made everyone, why do some people have good lives and some have bad lives?  Is it because of what we do?"

Markandeya explained: "God gave everyone a good start, but people chose to be greedy and angry.  Those who were bad went to a bad place after they died, and were reborn with bad things happening to them. Those who were good were reborn with good things happening to them.  Good and bad things follow you like shadows."

He said that people who are good, kind, and helpful get rewarded with happiness.  Those who are selfish and mean get punished.  He told the Pandavas that they would be rewarded for their good deeds, and that they would surely win in the end.  Then, another holy man, Narada, arrived, and everyone listened to Markandeya's amazing stories.
