King Dhritarashtra was watching the great battle.  He asked his advisor, Sanjaya, "Tell me, what happened when Satyaki fought Drona?"

Sanjaya said, "King, it was a scary battle! Satyaki, a brave warrior, was fighting Drona.  Satyaki shot twenty-five arrows at Drona.  Drona, a very strong warrior, shot back five golden arrows. They flew like hissing snakes and hit Satyaki!

Satyaki was angry. He roared like a mad elephant and shot fifty flaming arrows at Drona! Drona shot many arrows back at Satyaki. Satyaki was tired and scared.  He didn't know what to do.

The Kaurava soldiers cheered because Satyaki was losing.  King Yudhishthira saw Satyaki in trouble. He shouted, "Satyaki is in danger! He's like the sun being eaten by a monster! We must help him!"

Yudhishthira told his army to help Satyaki. He ordered Dhrishtadyumna to attack Drona.  He said, "Drona is playing with Satyaki like a cat with a mouse! Everyone, go help Satyaki! I’ll follow with the rest of the army."

The Pandava army rushed to help. They shot many arrows at Drona.  But Drona was too strong! He smiled and kept shooting arrows. He was like the sun, too bright to look at!  Drona was very powerful, and many soldiers died.

Then, Yudhishthira heard a loud conch shell being blown. It was Krishna!  He was worried about his friend, Arjuna, who was also in danger.  Arjuna was fighting many, many enemies.  Yudhishthira was so worried!

Yudhishthira turned to Satyaki, tears in his eyes. "Satyaki," he said, "Arjuna is like your brother. He needs help!  You are strong and brave. You're like Krishna himself!  Please, go help Arjuna!"

Yudhishthira explained how important Satyaki was to Arjuna, and how brave and strong he was. He said that helping Arjuna now was the most important thing.

He told Satyaki that Arjuna was surrounded by many enemies, and that he might be killed. He urged Satyaki to go and help, saying that only someone as brave and strong as Satyaki could save Arjuna in this dangerous situation.

Yudhishthira reminded Satyaki of their friendship and Arjuna's high opinion of him, begging him to rush to Arjuna's aid and display his unmatched skill and valor. He painted a vivid picture of the chaotic battlefield where Arjuna was struggling against an overwhelming force.

So, Satyaki promised to go help his friend Arjuna. He knew it was dangerous, but he was brave enough to face any enemy to save his friend.
