Once upon a time, the Pandavas and the Kauravas were very good at fighting.  Their teacher, Drona, decided it was time for them to pay their tuition fees!

He told his students, "Go fight King Drupada of Panchala, and bring him back to me! That will be your payment."

The students, including Duryodhana, Karna, and the Pandavas, all agreed.  They rode into battle in their chariots.  They were like brave lions, attacking the Panchala army.  They surrounded King Drupada's city.

King Drupada saw the huge army and fought bravely. He shot many arrows from his white chariot.  But Arjuna, the best archer, said to Drona, "Let the others fight first.  They can't defeat Drupada."

Arjuna and his brothers waited. Drupada fought so well that the Kauravas thought there were many Drupadas!  The Panchalas fought back hard, blowing horns and drums.  But the Kauravas were losing! They ran away, crying.

The Pandavas saw the Kauravas running.  Arjuna quickly told his brother Yudhishthira not to join the battle.  Arjuna, Bhima, Nakula, and Sahadeva jumped into the fight.

Bhima, strong as an elephant, smashed the enemy elephants with his mace.  Arjuna shot arrows so fast, it was like a storm of arrows!  He even knocked Karna off his elephant!  The Panchalas fought bravely, but the Pandavas were too strong.

Arjuna wanted to help his teacher, so he fought even harder.  He fought a brave Panchala warrior named Satyajit.  Arjuna was so skilled that he broke Satyajit’s bow and arrows many times!

Then, Arjuna cleverly jumped from his chariot onto King Drupada’s chariot! He captured King Drupada.  Seeing this, the Panchala army ran away.

Arjuna told his brothers not to hurt King Drupada's soldiers.  He said, "He is a relative of the Kauravas. Let’s just give Drona his fee.”

The Pandavas brought Drupada to Drona.  Drona was happy but he remembered that he and Drupada had been friends once. Drona gave Drupada half of his kingdom as a gift and they became friends again!

Drupada went back to his kingdom, sad but wiser. He knew he couldn't defeat Drona in battle and he made a new plan to get even.  And Drona got his payment: half of Panchala and the city of Ahicchatra, thanks to Arjuna’s bravery.
