Once upon a time, during a great battle, Aswatthaman, Drona's son, got really angry at Karna.  Aswatthaman thought Karna was bragging and being mean to his uncle.

"You're a bad guy!" Aswatthaman shouted at Karna.  "You talk big, but where was your strength when Arjuna defeated Jayadratha right in front of you?  Arjuna is super strong! Even the gods couldn't beat him! How can you hope to win against him?"  Aswatthaman was so angry, he charged at Karna with his sword!

But the King and Kripa, a brave warrior, stopped Aswatthaman.  Karna said, "Let him go! I'll show him how strong I am!"

Aswatthaman calmed down a little. "Okay," he said. "But Arjuna will teach you a lesson!"

The King told Aswatthaman to stop being angry.  "You and Karna are important," he said. "We need you all to fight the Pandavas. They’re coming to attack!"

Kripa also asked Aswatthaman to calm down.  "We forgive you," he said, "but Arjuna will deal with your anger."

Then, the Pandavas and their friends attacked! Karna, a mighty warrior, stood ready.  It was a huge, scary battle!

The Pandavas shouted, "There's Karna! Fight us, you bad guy!" They all wanted to defeat Karna, because he was mean.

But Karna was strong! He fought back bravely, shooting lots of arrows.  It was like the gods fighting the demons!

Karna was so good that the Pandavas couldn't even hit him! He was a super fast and awesome archer.  He hit the Pandavas' chariots and horses!  Lots of soldiers died.  The battlefield looked like a scary place, full of dead and hurt people.

Duryodhana saw how well Karna was fighting. "Arjuna is coming for Karna!" he said to Aswatthaman. "You must help him!"

So Aswatthaman, Kripa, and others went to help Karna.  Arjuna, meanwhile, rushed towards Karna like a powerful elephant!

Arjuna and Karna fought fiercely, shooting arrows at each other.  They were so strong! They broke each other's bows. Arjuna even shot Karna's horses and driver. Karna had to jump into Kripa’s chariot.

Duryodhana was worried! He saw Karna was losing and his army was scared.  He wanted to fight Arjuna himself.

But Duryodhana's uncle stopped him.  "Don't fight Arjuna! You’ll die!" He said. "Let Aswatthaman fight Arjuna instead."  Aswatthaman promised to protect Duryodhana.

Duryodhana told Aswatthaman to fight the Pandavas. "You’re the strongest warrior!  You’re the only one who can defeat the Pandavas!", he said.  "Destroy them all!"


