Once upon a time, after a wise man finished talking, Krishna, a very powerful and holy person, spoke to Yudhisthira, a brave prince.  Krishna said, "Yudhishthira, say a special prayer with 1008 names of Mahadeva (a great god).  This will make Mahadeva happy."

Krishna explained, "Long ago, I prayed this same prayer on Mount Meru. It helped me get everything I wanted!  You can do the same!"

Then, another wise man, Kapila, chimed in. "I prayed to Mahadeva for many lives. He made me wise, so I wouldn't have to be reborn again and again."

A kind wise man named Charusirsha added, "I prayed on Gokarna mountain for 100 years!  I got 100 amazing sons as a reward – all strong, good, and who lived for a very, very long time!"

Valmiki, a famous poet, shared his story. "Some people wrongly accused me of doing something terrible. I felt very bad! So, I prayed to Mahadeva, and he made everything okay. He even said my name would be famous!"

Parashurama, a great warrior, said, "I did something wrong, too.  I prayed to Mahadeva, and he forgave me and gave me powerful weapons to win any battle!"

Viswamitra, a wise man, said, "I wanted to be a Brahmin priest. Mahadeva helped me do that!"

Asita Devala, another wise man, explained, "A powerful god made me lose my good luck. But Mahadeva gave it all back, and even made me famous!"

Gritsamada, a friend of a god named Indra, said, "Indra asked me to sing a special song at a big ceremony.  I did it wrong!  A very angry wise man turned me into a deer!  But I prayed to Mahadeva, and he helped me become strong, happy, and even immortal!"

Krishna spoke again. "I prayed to Mahadeva for a very long time on Manimantha mountain. He made me loved by everyone, strong, and gave me many wonderful gifts!"

Another wise man, Jaigishavya, said, “Mahadeva found me in Varanasi and gave me the power to rule!”

Garga said, “Mahadeva was happy with my prayers, and he gave me amazing knowledge and a thousand wonderful sons who lived for ages and ages!”

Parasara shared, “I wanted a special son, and Mahadeva gave me Krishna, a very wise and famous son who helped many people.”

Mandavya said, “I was wrongly punished, but Mahadeva saved me, gave me a long life and freed me from suffering.”

Galava shared his story, “My mother was sad because she thought she would never see my father again. I prayed to Mahadeva, and he brought my father and mother back to me!”

Krishna then told Yudhisthira, “Many people get blessings from Mahadeva.  Even bad people can be forgiven if they pray to him sincerely.  If someone is kind, even if they're rich and enjoy life's luxuries, it is just as good as being a holy hermit.  Mahadeva can give you anything—power, wealth, or even to rule the world!  Even praying to him in your heart is enough to be forgiven.”

Krishna continued, “Many things in the world – the sun, moon, wind, fire, gods, animals, good and bad things – all come from Mahadeva. He is the creator. The best way to honor him is by praying the special prayer.”  Krishna then explained that anyone who says this prayer will gain amazing benefits depending on their place in society.  A Brahmin priest will gain wisdom, a warrior will win battles, a merchant will become wealthy, and a servant will gain happiness.  He said that saying the prayer would allow one to live for as long as there are pores on your skin!
