Once upon a time, King Dasaratha was a happy king. But then, his wife, Queen Kaikeyi, said some very unkind things.  They made the king so sad! He felt confused and scared.  He wondered if he was dreaming, or sick, or if a bad star was making him unhappy.

After a while, the king felt a little calmer. But then he remembered what Kaikeyi had asked for, and he got upset again. He was like a scared deer seeing a lion! He sighed deeply and sat on the ground, looking like a sleepy snake.  He cried, "Oh, what will happen to me?" and fainted.

When he woke up, he was very angry.  He looked at Kaikeyi with eyes that could almost burn her! He shouted, "You are so mean! You want to ruin our family! What have Rama, my son, and I ever done to you? Rama always treated you like his own mother! Why do you want to hurt us?"

He explained that he loved Rama more than anything.  He said, "I could lose my other wives, my kingdom, even my life, but I can't lose Rama!  He makes me happy.  The sun could disappear, the plants could die without water, but I can’t live without Rama!"

He begged Kaikeyi to change her mind. "Please, I'm begging you," he said.  "If you want to test my love for Bharata, my other son, please do that instead.  You once said Rama should be king because he’s so good.  Were you lying then?"

The king was very upset. He said Kaikeyi must be possessed by a bad spirit or a bad star.  He told her that Rama was kind, brave, and good. He was loved by everyone!  He was smart, strong, and always helped people.

King Dasaratha told Kaikeyi that Rama never said a bad word to anyone. How could he send his kind son away?  He said, "My life is almost over. Please have mercy on me. Everything I own will be yours if you just save Rama!" He fell at her feet, begging.

But Kaikeyi wouldn't listen.  She said, "King, you promised me two wishes. You can't go back on your word!  If you don't send Rama away, I will die!"  She was very stubborn.

The king was heartbroken. He knew what Kaikeyi wanted: to send Rama away and make Bharata king. He cried out, "Rama! Rama!" and fell to the ground like a tree falling down.

He pleaded with Kaikeyi again and again. "Who told you to do this?" he asked. "Rama is good, and Bharata is good.  I don’t understand why you want to hurt us. Everyone will hate me if Rama leaves!  How can I face Rama and tell him to go into the forest? How will his mother feel?"

The king said he was sad and scared. He kept saying that without Rama, he would die.  He said that sending Rama away would make everyone unhappy.  It would be like taking away the sun.

But Kaikeyi wouldn't give in. The king, so sad and hopeless, fell unconscious at his wife's feet.
