Once upon a time, in a great battle, Arjuna, a mighty warrior, was fighting.  Many soldiers attacked him, throwing arrows like rain.  Arjuna, brave and strong, shot back, and six hundred soldiers fell! The others, scared like mice seeing a cat, ran away.

But they came back, surrounding Arjuna again. He fought fiercely, cutting down heads and arms. The battlefield was covered with bodies, and birds circled above like a dark cloud.

Two brave warriors, Srutayus and Achyutayus, were angry. They wanted to defeat Arjuna for their friend. They threw thousands of arrows, covering Arjuna like dark clouds over a lake.  

Srutayus then threw a spear, hitting Arjuna hard! Arjuna fell unconscious, making his friend Krishna worried. Achyutayus threw another spear, making Arjuna's wound even worse. Arjuna grabbed his chariot's flagpole to stay up.  Everyone thought Arjuna was dead! Krishna was very sad.

But then, Arjuna woke up! He saw his chariot covered in arrows, and Srutayus and Achyutayus waiting.  Arjuna called for a powerful weapon.  Thousands of arrows flew out, hitting Srutayus and Achyutayus!  Arjuna fought them bravely again and quickly defeated them. They fell to the ground, like big trees blown down in a storm.

More soldiers came to fight, even elephant riders.  Arjuna was unstoppable! He cut down heads and arms, the battlefield was full of blood.  Many elephants fell, too.  More and more soldiers from faraway lands joined the battle, but Arjuna's arrows were like a swarm of locusts!  He defeated them all!  The battlefield became a river of blood.

Then, another warrior, Srutayus, attacked.  He was very strong and hit Arjuna's chariot and even Krishna!  Arjuna was very angry. He shot arrows at Srutayus, cutting his bow and weapons to pieces.  Srutayus tried again, but Arjuna quickly cut off his arms and then his head!  Srutayus fell with a loud crash.

Finally, with so many enemies around, Arjuna became hidden, like the sun behind dark clouds,  waiting for his next fight.
