Once upon a time, during a big battle, Duryodhana, a Kaurava prince, asked Aswatthaman, Drona's son, a super strong warrior, to help them win.

Aswatthaman said, "I'll fight my best!  The Pandavas are my friends, but in battle, it's different.  We could defeat them quickly, but they are also very strong. We’re all fighting hard! The Pandavas can't lose as long as their brothers are alive. You, Duryodhana, are greedy and tricky; that's why you don't trust us."

Aswatthaman promised to fight bravely for Duryodhana. "I will defeat many enemies, even the Panchalas, Somakas, Kaikeyas, and Pandayas!  They'll run away like scared cows when I attack!" he boasted.  He said Yudhishthira, the Pandava leader, would be very sad to see his soldiers defeated.

Aswatthaman went to battle and fought bravely. He challenged all the enemy warriors to attack him at once. They threw many weapons, like a rain storm! Aswatthaman was amazing. He fought back and defeated ten brave warriors right in front of Dhrishtadyumna and the Pandava brothers!

The scared Panchalas and Somakas ran away. Dhrishtadyumna, a brave warrior, shouted, “Fight me if you are so strong! Don't run from a real battle!”

Dhrishtadyumna attacked Aswatthaman with sharp arrows. Aswatthaman fought back, very angry, like a snake stepped on! He yelled, "Wait! I will defeat you!"

But Dhrishtadyumna said, “I won’t kill you today because your father is still alive.  I'll kill him first, then you!"

This made Aswatthaman very mad. He shot many arrows at Dhrishtadyumna.  They fought hard!  Everyone watched, amazed.  Gods and magical beings even cheered them on!

Their fight was so intense, it was like a storm of arrows.  Then, Aswatthaman broke Dhrishtadyumna's chariot, and the Panchala soldiers ran.

Aswatthaman was so good at fighting, he defeated many more soldiers. The Pandavas were scared. Aswatthaman was powerful, like a great fire burning everything in its path.  All the Kauravas cheered, happy their warrior was winning.  He looked as glorious as a king of the gods!
