Once upon a time, Yudhishthira asked his wise grandfather, Bhishma, about a very special person: Vishnu.  Yudhishthira said Vishnu was amazing – he created everything, but wasn't created himself! He had many names, like Narayana, Hrishikesa, Govinda, and Kesava.  He was super powerful and nobody could defeat him.

Bhishma said, “Many wise people told me about Vishnu.  They said he was the most wonderful being, the greatest of all! He is everywhere. He is called Purusha.”  

Bhishma then told Yudhishthira the story of how Vishnu created the world.  First, he made five things: wind, light, water, space, and earth.  He floated on the water and created Consciousness, the very first thing to be alive. From Vishnu’s belly button, a beautiful lotus flower grew! From that flower, Brahma, the creator god, was born.

But a bad guy, a giant named Madhu, appeared.  Madhu was very mean and tried to hurt Brahma.  But Vishnu, the super strong guy, fought and defeated Madhu. That’s why he was also called Madhusudana – “Madhu killer.”

Brahma then created many more things:  he had seven sons. One of these sons, Kasyapa, married many daughters of Daksha.  Their children became all sorts of creatures:  gods, animals, plants, and even people!  Aditi, one of Daksha's daughters, had a son named Vishnu.  This Vishnu was a very strong dwarf, who helped the good gods defeat the bad guys.

Vishnu also created day and night, the seasons, clouds, and all living and nonliving things. He even made different kinds of people: Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras. He also chose leaders for everything:  Dhatri to rule over everyone, Yama to rule over the dead, Kuvera for the treasures, and so on.

In the very beginning, people lived forever and didn’t need to have babies the way we do now. Later, they had babies by just touching each other.  Even later, they started having babies the way we do now!

Bhishma then talked about some bad people who lived in different parts of the world.  They weren’t around at the very beginning, but appeared later.

Bhishma ended by saying that the great god Narada himself said Vishnu, or Krishna, was the highest, greatest god of all – not just a normal person. He was impossible to understand completely! He was so amazing!
