Once upon a time, there was a big battle!  King Yudhishthira and his brothers, Bhima, Arjuna, Nakula, and Sahadeva, were fighting bravely.  The enemy soldiers shouted loudly when they saw the Pandava brothers.  They were scared because the Pandavas were super strong!

Bhima, with his big iron mace, charged towards the King of Sindhu.  Lots of enemy soldiers tried to stop him, but Bhima was too strong! He smashed an elephant, its driver, and fourteen soldiers!  Arjuna killed many enemy soldiers too.  Nakula and Sahadeva were amazing fighters, too; they sliced through enemies like a farmer cutting wheat!

The King of Trigartas fought bravely, too, but Yudhishthira shot him with an arrow, and he fell down. Yudhishthira's horses were killed, so he and his brother Sahadeva switched chariots.  Nakula fought bravely even when the enemy tried to trap him with an elephant.  He cleverly cut off the elephant's trunk and tusks with his sword!

Then, Bhima killed the King of Sindhu's driver with an arrow! The King's horses ran wild, and Bhima easily killed the King. Arjuna killed many more soldiers.  The battlefield was a mess – lots of dead soldiers and animals everywhere.

Jayadratha, the King of Sindhu, was very scared. He had taken Draupadi, Yudhishthira's wife, away.  He ran away as fast as he could! Yudhishthira found Draupadi and brought her back.  Bhima wanted to catch Jayadratha, but Arjuna told him to wait. Arjuna said they should find Jayadratha first, then they could punish him.

Draupadi was very angry!  She told Bhima and Arjuna that Jayadratha should be punished because he was so mean and had stolen her.  Then, Bhima and Arjuna went to find Jayadratha.  Yudhishthira returned home with Draupadi and the other brothers, everyone was very happy to have her back.

The brothers followed Jayadratha. Arjuna was so fast, he even shot one of Jayadratha's horses from far away! Finally, they caught up to the scared king. Arjuna asked Jayadratha why he was so cowardly.  Jayadratha didn't even answer. Bhima was ready to kill him, but Arjuna stopped him.  The story of their battle ended there.
