Once upon a time, after some wise holy men left, a very strong and powerful god named Shiva came to a snowy mountain. He looked like a shining golden tree!  He had a big bow and arrows that looked like poisonous snakes.  His wife, Parvati, was with him, and lots of happy spirits and women.  The whole mountain sparkled when they arrived! Then, it got very quiet.  Even the birds stopped singing!

Shiva saw Arjuna, a brave warrior, fighting a scary boar monster!  The boar wanted to hurt Arjuna. Arjuna, ready to fight, pointed his bow and arrows at the boar and said, "I haven't done anything to you, but since you want to hurt me, I'll defeat you!"

Just as Arjuna was about to shoot, Shiva, who was hidden as a hunter, shouted, "I saw the boar first!"  But Arjuna didn't stop. He shot his arrow, and Shiva shot his arrow at the same time!  BOOM! Both arrows hit the boar, who turned back into a mean monster, and then disappeared.

Arjuna saw Shiva, who was still disguised, and said, "Who are you? Why did you shoot the boar? I saw it first!  You have to fight me!"

Shiva smiled. "Don't worry," he said, "this forest is my home. Why are *you* here?  This place is tough even for a strong warrior like you."

Arjuna said, "I'm here because I'm a great warrior, and I live in this forest fighting monsters. That monster was just one of them."

Shiva said, "No, *I* defeated that monster. I saw it first.  Let's fight! Show me your strength!"

Arjuna got angry and shot lots of arrows at Shiva. Shiva didn't move! He just smiled and said, "Shoot more! I'm not hurt!"

Arjuna kept shooting, but nothing happened to Shiva! Arjuna was amazed. "Who are you?" he wondered. "Are you a god?"

Arjuna ran out of arrows.  He felt scared.  He used his bow to hit Shiva.  Then he used his sword! But his sword broke! He even threw rocks and trees, but Shiva didn't even flinch!  Finally, Shiva was so strong, he knocked Arjuna down!  Arjuna was hurt and tired.

Arjuna felt bad, and made a clay statue of Shiva. He offered it flowers. When he saw his flowers on Shiva's head, he knew it was really him!  He bowed down.

Shiva said, "Arjuna, you are very brave and strong! I am pleased with you. You are almost as strong as me! I will give you a powerful weapon."

Shiva showed himself to Arjuna. Arjuna was so happy. He worshipped Shiva and thanked him. Shiva forgave him, and they became friends.  Arjuna learned that Shiva was the strongest and most powerful of all the gods.
