Once upon a time, on a huge battlefield, Duryodhana saw the Pandavas' army.  It was so big and strong, it looked impossible to beat!  He was scared. He ran to his friend Karna and said, "Karna, my friend! We need your help! The Pandavas' army, with its many soldiers from Panchala, Kaikeya, and Matsya, is surrounding us! They are angry and ready to fight, like hissing snakes! The Pandavas are shouting with joy, sure they will win.  We need you to save us!"

Karna, sounding very brave, said, "Even if the great god Indra himself came to help Arjuna (the strongest Pandava), I would defeat him! Don't worry! I will defeat Arjuna and all the Panchalas. I will win this battle for you!  Arjuna is their strongest warrior. I will use my special weapon, a magic spear, to kill him.  After that, his brothers will either give up or run away! While I'm alive, you have nothing to fear!"

But then, Kripa, a wise warrior, smiled and said, "Karna, your words sound good, but your actions don't match! You’ve boasted a lot, but haven't shown your strength.  The Pandavas have always defeated you in battles before! You even ran away when the Gandharvas captured Duryodhana! You're no match for even one Pandava, let alone all of them!  Stop boasting and start fighting!"

Karna, still sounding very confident, replied, "Great warriors always talk big! It's how we show our courage! I have decided to defeat Arjuna and Krishna. That’s why I boast. I will win this battle and give Duryodhana the whole kingdom!"

Kripa shook his head.  "Karna, your words are empty.  Arjuna and Krishna are unbeatable!  The Pandavas have so many brave warriors fighting with them – Dhristhadyumna, Sikhandin, and many others! They are so strong, they could even defeat the gods! How can you hope to win?"

Karna laughed. "What you say about the Pandavas is true, they are very strong. But I have a special weapon from the god Indra. With this weapon, I will kill Arjuna. Without Arjuna, the rest of the Pandavas will lose. Then the kingdom will be Duryodhana’s."

Kripa said, "Karna, you boast too much! You love to talk down about the Pandavas and praise Duryodhana. But it’s not just about who's strong; it’s also about luck.  Duryodhana has many strong warriors with him, but that doesn't guarantee victory. Victory depends on destiny!"  And so, the battle continued, with Karna’s boasts and Kripa’s doubts echoing across the battlefield.
