Once upon a time, a wise man named Parasara told a king a very important story. He said that being good and kind is the most important thing.  It's more important than having rich friends or family.  Only people who are kind and respectful to their elders get rewarded for their goodness.  Dads are very important, even more important than moms!  Learning is also super important – the best thing you can learn is how to be happy and peaceful.

Parasara also talked about brave warriors.  A brave warrior who fights bravely in a war and gets hurt will go to a wonderful place in the sky. But a brave warrior should never fight someone who is tired, scared, hurt, or unarmed.  It's only fair to fight someone who is just as strong and ready to fight.  It’s good to die fighting a strong opponent, but it’s bad to die fighting someone weaker or mean.  No one can die before their time, and no one can die if their time isn't up.

We should always be kind to our elders and never let them do the work of servants. And we should never try to live longer by hurting others.

When it's time to die, it's good to die peacefully, maybe near a river or a special place.  When we die, our bodies go back to the earth. If someone dies unexpectedly in a good place, they might come back to life in a similar way. But their new body won’t be the same.  Our bodies are made of many things, and when we die, those things go back where they came from.  After we die, our soul floats in the sky like a cloud before finding a new body.

The best kind of life is a human life, even if it's not perfect. We should always try to be good because doing good things is how we can make the best of our lives.  It's really important to be kind to everyone and be happy for other people's happiness.

It's best to die peacefully and at a good time. Dying from poison, fire, or being hurt by others is not a good way to go. Good people don't usually die those ways, even if they are sick. Good people go to a very good place in the sky when they die.  Bad people go to a bad place.

Our biggest enemy is ignorance.  We can fight it with wisdom.  To be good, we should study, be kind to everyone, and always try to be wise.

Bhishma, another wise person, told this story to the king a long, long time ago.  So it’s a very old and important story!
