Once upon a time, there was a good king named Uparichara. He loved hunting, but he also loved being good.  He was a very powerful king, and he ruled the beautiful kingdom of Chedi.  One day, he decided to stop fighting and be a hermit. He prayed and meditated very hard.

The gods, led by Indra, came to see him. They were worried he wanted to become the king of the gods! They talked to him nicely, and convinced him to stop his hard prayers and rule his kingdom again.

Indra said, "King, please keep Chedi a good and fair place! If you are good, the whole world will be protected."  He promised Uparichara many good things: a magical flying chariot, a special garland that would protect him in battle, and a special bamboo pole to show that he was a good and just king. Every year, kings would put this pole up and celebrate Indra’s goodness.

Uparichara had five strong and brave sons. He made them rulers of different parts of his kingdom.  One son, Vrihadratha, even ruled Magadha! His other sons were Pratyagraha, Kusamva, Mavella, and Yadu.  Each son started his own family and kingdom.

One day, Uparichara was flying in his magic chariot when he saw a mountain trying to crush a river.  He kicked the mountain!  The river flowed freely again, but the mountain had two children – a boy and a girl – with the river. Uparichara raised them. The boy became his top general, and he married the girl, Girika.

One day, Girika told Uparichara that she was ready to have a baby.  The same day, Uparichara’s ancestors asked him to hunt for them. He went hunting, but he was thinking about his beautiful wife. He found a lovely Asoka tree, and as he sat there, he thought of Girika.  He gave his special seed (his sperm) to a hawk to take to Girika.

But the hawk fought another hawk, and the seed fell into the Yamuna River.  A magical fish (an Apsara who was cursed!) swallowed the seed! Later, fishermen caught the fish. Inside, they found two babies – a boy and a girl!

The king raised the boy, and he grew up to be a good king named Matsya. The girl, who smelled a little fishy because she was once a fish, helped her foster father. She was called Satyavati.

One day, a great wise man, Rishi Parasara, saw Satyavati. He loved her, and asked her to marry him.  She was shy and worried about people seeing them.  Parasara made a magical fog to hide them. He also promised to keep her pure and gave her a wish that made her smell sweet and lovely!

Satyavati and Parasara had a son, who they called Vyasa because he organized all the important stories and teachings into books.  Because he was born on an island, he was also called Dwaipayana.

Many other important people were born in special ways: Bhishma, Vidura, Krishna, and the Pandavas and Kauravas!  This is how many of the important people in the great battle of the Mahabharata were born. There were so many warriors that it would take ten thousand years to name them all.
