Once, the big battle calmed down a little.  The Pandavas had already defeated lots of enemies.  Then, Shakuni, the clever uncle of Duryodhana, arrived with his 700 soldiers. He shouted, "Fight bravely, my warriors!" He asked, "Where's the king, Duryodhana?"

Some soldiers pointed.  "There! See that big, shiny umbrella – that's where Duryodhana is, surrounded by his soldiers!  You can hear their shouts!"

Shakuni rushed to Duryodhana.  He was very happy and said, "King, attack the Pandavas! I've defeated their horses.  Yudhishthira is hard to beat, but we'll win!  Let's destroy their chariots, then their elephants and soldiers!"

Duryodhana's soldiers cheered and attacked.  Arrows flew everywhere!  The sounds of bows and arrows were very loud.

Arjuna, one of the Pandavas, saw them coming. He said to Krishna, "Let's charge! I'll end this war today! It's the eighteenth day of this terrible battle.  The enemy army, once huge, is almost gone. It's like a cow's footprint compared to what it was! We should have made peace after Bhishma died. But Duryodhana is stubborn. He didn't listen to Bhishma's good advice, or Drona's, or even Vidura's!  He didn't stop fighting even after Karna, Drona, and so many great warriors died! He's just foolish and greedy!  No clever king would fight so long after losing so many people.   Vidura told me Duryodhana wouldn't give up until he was dead! This war is Duryodhana’s fault; he was born to destroy his own family!  Let's finish this today."

Krishna urged his horses forward. Arjuna and Krishna charged into the enemy army.  It was like a huge forest of spears, clubs, chariots, and soldiers. Arjuna was amazing. He shot arrows like rain from his bow, Gandiva.  The arrows were so fast and powerful that they went right through the enemy's armor. It was like a big storm of golden arrows! The Kaurava soldiers couldn’t fight back. Arjuna was so strong, he defeated them all easily. Just like Indra, the king of the gods, defeats demons.  Arjuna was ready to finish the war. He was going to defeat Duryodhana!
