King Dhritarashtra asked Sanjaya, "Tell me about Arjuna's amazing battle! Tell me how he fought the Samsaptakas and the other kings!  Tell me about Arjuna's fight with Ashvatthama, too!"

Sanjaya said, "King, listen!  Arjuna fought bravely! It was a terrible battle.  Arjuna charged into the Samsaptakas, a huge army like a stormy ocean.  He shot many arrows.  He cut down warriors like picking flowers.  Their heads fell like lotus blossoms. He cut off arms, horses, chariots, and even flags!  He sent many soldiers to the land of the dead.

Angry warriors charged at Arjuna, roaring like angry bulls.  They all shot arrows, but Arjuna fought back, just like Indra (the god of thunder) fought the demons!  He shot many arrows, and the enemy fell. He was like the wind, blowing away dark clouds.  Arjuna was so strong! He broke chariots, killed horses, and drivers.  The gods cheered for him!  Flowers fell from the sky.  A magical voice said, 'Arjuna and Krishna are like the sun, moon, and wind – they are invincible!'

Seeing all this, Ashvatthama, Drona's son, wanted to fight Arjuna. He smiled and said, ‘Great warrior, let us have a mighty battle.’  Arjuna felt honored.  He asked Krishna, ‘Should I finish the Samsaptakas first, or fight Ashvatthama?’  Krishna said, ‘Fight Ashvatthama first! This is a great challenge!’ Krishna and Arjuna went to fight him.

Ashvatthama shot many arrows at Krishna and Arjuna. Arjuna, very angry, cut Ashvatthama’s bow in three pieces with his arrows!  Ashvatthama took a new bow and shot thousands of arrows at them!  Arrows flew from everywhere!  Ashvatthama roared like a storm cloud.  Arjuna said, ‘Krishna, look at Ashvatthama's attack! But I will defeat him!’  Arjuna broke every one of Ashvatthama's arrows into three pieces! Then Arjuna went back to fighting the Samsaptakas. He shot his arrows everywhere, killing elephants, horses, and soldiers.  His arrows were like the sun’s rays, drying up a giant ocean!

Ashvatthama tried to attack again, but Arjuna cut his arrows.  Arjuna then shot many arrows at Ashvatthama, like giving a generous gift. Then, Arjuna left the Samsaptakas and went to fight Ashvatthama, leaving the less important battle for later."
