Once upon a time, in a great battle, Arjuna, a super strong warrior, was surrounded by thousands of enemy soldiers!  They threw spears, clubs, and arrows at him like a swarm of angry bees.  But Arjuna was amazing! He dodged everything with his shiny, golden arrows.  Even the gods, magical creatures, and monsters watched, shouting, "Wow!  Great shot!"

Meanwhile, Satyaki and Abhimanyu, two brave friends, were fighting too.  The enemies broke their chariot, but they quickly jumped into Abhimanyu's chariot.  Together, they fought bravely and defeated many enemies.

On the other side, Drona and Bhishma, powerful warriors, were attacking Yudhishthira's army.  But Yudhishthira and his brothers fought back fiercely.  It was a terrible battle, even scarier than the fights between the gods and giants long ago!  Bhima and Ghatotkacha, two mighty warriors, fought bravely.  Duryodhana, the enemy king, tried to stop them. Ghatotkacha was so strong, he fought even better than his father!  Bhima got angry and hit Duryodhana in the chest with an arrow.  Duryodhana fainted and had to be taken away from the battle.

His army started to run away.  Bhima chased them, shooting arrows.  Yudhishthira and Dhrishtadyumna, another great warrior, also helped defeat the fleeing enemy soldiers.  Bhishma and Drona couldn't stop them!  Arjuna, super-angry now, rained arrows on the enemy, like a stormy sky pouring rain!  The enemy ran and ran.

Bhishma and Drona tried to rally their scared army. Duryodhana, the king, encouraged his soldiers. They stopped running, feeling ashamed. Duryodhana went to Bhishma and said, "Grandfather, it's shameful that our army ran when you, Drona, Kripa, and all our friends are still fighting!  The Pandavas shouldn't be able to defeat us.  You're letting them win!"

Bhishma laughed, "King, I’ve told you many times, even the gods can't beat the Pandavas! But I’ll do my best.  Today, I will personally stop the Pandavas."

Duryodhana was happy. He ordered the horns and drums to be played. The Pandavas, hearing the noise, did the same, ready for more fighting!
