Once upon a time, the Pandavas, five brave brothers, were forced to live in the forest.  Their friends and family were very angry about this.  The Bhojas, Vrishnis, and Andhakas, along with many other kings, rushed to the forest to see the Pandavas.  They were furious with the Kauravas, the bad brothers who had done this.

Lord Krishna, a very powerful and wise friend of the Pandavas, was also there. He was very, very angry!  He said, "We will defeat the Kauravas! We will fight and win!  Duryodhana, Karna, and all the others who did wrong will be defeated!"

Arjuna, one of the Pandava brothers, saw Krishna was very angry. To calm him down, Arjuna told Krishna about all the amazing things Krishna had done in his past lives. Arjuna said, "Krishna, you once lived on a mountain for ten thousand years, eating only water!  You stood on one leg for a hundred years, eating only air! You did many, many amazing things!"  Arjuna listed many of Krishna's incredible feats of strength, wisdom, and sacrifice.

After Arjuna finished talking, Krishna smiled.  He said to Arjuna, "You are my best friend, and everything I have is yours. We are one.  We will win this fight together.”

Then Draupadi, the wife of the Pandavas, came forward.  She was very sad and angry.  She had been treated very badly by the Kauravas. They had humiliated her.  She cried and told Krishna and the others about the terrible things the Kauravas had done. She reminded everyone of the Kauravas' many cruel acts against the Pandavas and herself— poisoning Bhima, trying to burn them in a house fire, and even publicly humiliating her.  She was so brave!

Krishna comforted Draupadi and promised to help. He said, "Don't worry, Draupadi. We will fight for you! We will win!"

Arjuna promised Draupadi that everything would be alright. Dhrishtadyumna, Draupadi's brother, even told everyone who he would fight and defeat in the upcoming battle.  

Everyone agreed to fight for the Pandavas.  They were ready to fight the Kauravas, and win back what was rightfully theirs.  The great battle was about to begin!
