Once upon a time, after a big battle, the Kaurava soldiers were very angry.  They wanted to fight the Pandavas.  Arjuna, a very strong Pandava warrior, fought bravely with his special bow, Gandiva. He was like a scary, poisonous snake!  He stopped the Kauravas from hurting Sahadeva.  Arjuna shot many arrows.  He knocked down horses, and even cut off arms and heads!

King Duryodhana saw his army getting beaten. He was furious!  He told his few remaining soldiers, "Attack the Pandavas! Kill them all!" The brave Kaurava soldiers attacked again.  But the Pandavas, with arrows like poisonous snakes, defeated them quickly.  The battlefield was filled with so much dust, you couldn't even see which way was north or south!

Many Pandava soldiers fought, and quickly defeated the huge Kaurava army. Duryodhana's army, which was once so big, was all gone! Only Duryodhana was left, hurt and alone. He was sad and scared.  The Pandavas were happy and shouted with joy! Duryodhana, couldn't stand the noise of the arrows anymore, he wanted to run away.

Dhritarashtra, Duryodhana's father, asked Sanjaya, his messenger, how many Pandava soldiers were left. Sanjaya said, "Only a few thousand soldiers, elephants, horses, and foot soldiers."  He also told Dhritarashtra about Duryodhana's escape.

Duryodhana, all alone, ran to a lake. He remembered the wise Vidura's warning that this would happen. He was very sad that his army was gone. He wanted to hide in the lake.

The Pandavas, led by Dhrishtadyumna, attacked the last few Kaurava soldiers. Arjuna, looking handsome on his white chariot, fought bravely with his bow and arrows.  Soon, the Kaurava army was gone!  Only a few warriors were left, including Duryodhana's cousin Kripa, Ashwatthama, and Kritavarma.

Sanjaya, the messenger, was almost killed but was saved by Krishna.  He was hurt and went to find Duryodhana. He found Duryodhana, hurt and crying alone.  Sanjaya told Duryodhana that his brothers and all his soldiers were dead. Duryodhana told Sanjaya to tell his blind father that he had gone to hide in the lake. He was too sad to live after losing everything.

Later, Sanjaya met the last few Kaurava warriors – Kripa, Ashwatthama, and Kritavarma. They were all sad that Duryodhana was gone. They cried, and then ran away to avoid the Pandavas.

Sanjaya returned to the Kaurava camp, but it was empty and sad. All the soldiers had run away, scared of the Pandavas. The women cried terribly because all their husbands and brothers were dead. The whole camp was filled with sadness and tears.

Yuyutsu, a kind prince, asked the Pandavas for permission to help take care of the women and the remaining people.  Yudhishthira said yes. Yuyutsu safely led the people back to the city.

He then saw Vidura, who was also very sad. Yuyutsu told him about the battle and Duryodhana's escape. Vidura praised Yuyutsu for being kind and helping the people.  The city was filled with sadness, but Yuyutsu did what he could to help.  The story ended with the city mourning the terrible loss of the war.
