Sanjaya said, "The battle raged on! Shalya led the Kaurava army against the Pandavas.  Even though they were tired, the Kauravas were so many that they pushed the Pandavas back.  The Pandavas were fighting hard, even with Krishna and Arjuna watching!

Arjuna rained arrows on Kripa and Kritavarma.  Sahadeva fought Shakuni. Nakula watched the Madras king. Draupadi's five sons fought many Kuru kings. Shikhandi fought Drona's son. Bhima, the strong one, fought a king with his big club. Yudhishthira fought Shalya.

Shalya was amazing! He fought the whole Pandava army by himself! He was like a bright star next to the moon, fighting so bravely! He shot arrows like poisonous snakes at Yudhishthira and Bhima.  Everyone watched, amazed by Shalya's skill!

The Pandavas were hurt and ran away, even though Yudhishthira told them to stay.  Yudhishthira was angry. He was a great warrior, and he decided to fight Shalya himself.

Yudhishthira called his brothers and Krishna. He said, "Bhishma, Drona, and Karna are gone. We've all fought bravely. Now it's my turn to fight Shalya!  Two brave heroes will protect my chariot. They're so strong, even the gods can't beat them!  I will fight my uncle, Shalya.  He will kill me, or I will kill him!"

Yudhishthira's friends gave him a super strong chariot with lots of weapons.  The Pancalas, Somakas, and Matsyas cheered loudly.

Yudhishthira fought Shalya. They were both strong warriors.  Shalya rained arrows on Yudhishthira like a storm. Yudhishthira fought back, showing everyone what Drona had taught him. They fought like two tigers!

Meanwhile, Bhima fought Duryodhana. Dhrishtadyumna, Satyaki, and Madri's sons fought other Kuru heroes.  The battle was fierce!

Duryodhana threw a spear and broke Bhima's flag.  Then he broke Bhima’s bow!  But Bhima, still strong, threw a dart and hit Duryodhana. Duryodhana fell to the ground. Bhima then cut off his driver's head!  Duryodhana's horses ran wild, pulling his broken chariot.

Ashwatthama, Kripa, and Kritavarma tried to save Duryodhana.  Arjuna started shooting arrows.

Yudhishthira, usually calm, got very angry. He fought like a furious storm!  He destroyed many soldiers and chariots.  He cleared the battlefield. Then he shouted, "Shalya, wait!"

Shalya and Yudhishthira fought again.  They showered each other with arrows. They looked like beautiful, but dangerous, flowering trees. Everyone wondered who would win!

Shalya shot many arrows at Yudhishthira and broke his bow.  But Yudhishthira got a new bow and shot many arrows at Shalya, breaking his bow too. He killed Shalya’s horses and his driver. He even broke Shalya's flag!

The Kaurava army broke. Drona's son saved Shalya. They ran away, but they heard Yudhishthira roar!  Shalya got a new chariot – a very strong one, making the enemies tremble.  The battle was far from over!"
