Arjuna finally defeated Karna!  The Kaurava army ran away.  Krishna, Arjuna's friend, hugged Arjuna happily.  "You defeated Karna!" Krishna cried. "People will remember your victory like they remember the great god Indra defeating the evil Vritra!"  Indra used his thunder, and Arjuna used his arrows.

Krishna told Arjuna, "Go tell King Yudhishthira about your amazing win!  This will make you famous and pay back your debt to the king.  Even Dharma Raja, the king of righteousness, came to watch your battle with Karna, but he was hurt and had to leave."

Arjuna said, "Okay," and Krishna turned their chariot around. Krishna told the soldiers, "Stay here and guard the area!" Then he told some other important warriors, "Stay here until we get back from telling the King!" They all agreed, and Krishna and Arjuna went to see Yudhishthira.

They found Yudhishthira resting on a fancy golden bed.  They bowed before him, and Yudhishthira saw their joy and their wounds. He thought Karna was dead! He jumped up and hugged them both tightly.  He asked what happened, and Krishna told him all about the battle and how Arjuna defeated Karna.

Krishna smiled. "Yudhishthira," he said, "you, your brothers, and Arjuna are safe!  You've won the war! Karna, the powerful son of Radha, is dead! The earth drinks his blood today!"  He added, "Now, you are king!  Rule wisely and enjoy your victory!"

Yudhishthira was so happy! He thanked Krishna and Arjuna.  He said, “It’s no surprise Arjuna won with you as his friend!” Yudhishthira remembered that wise men said Krishna and Arjuna were actually the ancient gods, Nara and Narayana, here to help good people.

Then Yudhishthira went to see the battlefield.  He saw Karna, covered in arrows, but shining like he was surrounded by many golden lamps.  He was amazed.  Yudhishthira praised Krishna and Arjuna for their victory, saying, "Thanks to you, we have finally won after 13 long, hard years!”

Everyone celebrated!  All the Pandava soldiers were very happy and they all praised Yudhishthira, Arjuna and Krishna.

But back in the Kaurava camp, King Dhritarashtra and his wife Gandhari were heartbroken when they heard that Karna was dead.  They cried a lot.  Vidura and Sanjaya helped comfort them.

Vyasa, a very wise man, said that listening to the story of this great battle is like performing a holy act. It brings good luck, happiness, and success in life! That is the end of Karna Parva.
