King Janamejaya asked a wise man, "How should people listen to the Mahabharata story? What good things happen if they listen? What should we give to the person telling the story?"

The wise man, Vaishampayana, said, "Listen! The Mahabharata is a very special story.  Long ago, even the gods came to Earth to hear it! This story tells about the beginnings of many important people, gods, and even the whole world! It talks about rivers, mountains, gods, and even magical beings!"

"Just listening to the names of all these things makes bad things go away! If you listen carefully from beginning to end, you should give gifts to the people who helped tell the story. Give gifts to the priests (Brahmins)! Give them nice things like cows, clothes, jewelry, and even houses! You can give away other things too, like horses, elephants, or even carriages. Give away as much as you can! The more you give, the better!"

"When you listen, be happy and believe in the story.  Give gifts as you listen."

"The best person to tell the story is someone good and kind, dressed in white clothes, who knows a lot and is calm and peaceful. They should tell the story clearly and nicely."

"The story is divided into parts called Parvas.  At the end of each part, give even more gifts to the priests. The more gifts you give, the happier and more lucky you will be!  For example, at the end of the first part, your reward will be like getting a special wish granted.  At the end of each part, you'll get even more amazing rewards—like a magical chariot, or living in heaven for a long, long time!"

"At the very end of the whole Mahabharata, give a very big gift to the person who told the story.  Give them a copy of the story and lots of gold.  Give gifts of food to the priests after each part, too. Different kinds of food for different parts of the story."

Vaishampayana continued, "The Mahabharata is a very holy story. It's about good and bad, gods and people.  Listening to it washes away all your bad deeds, even very bad ones, like hurting someone!  It's even better than listening to many other sacred stories.  Everyone should listen—men and women!  So listen carefully, give gifts generously, and be happy!"
