Once upon a time, in a great battle, Arjuna picked up his bow and arrows.  The Pandava army cheered loudly!  They blew their horns and beat their drums.  It was a very noisy celebration!  Even the gods and other magical beings came to watch!

King Yudhishthira, who was always fair, got out of his chariot. He took off his armor. He walked towards the enemy army, praying to his ancestors.  His brothers, Arjuna, Bhima, Nakula, and Sahadeva, followed him, along with Krishna.  The other kings in the Pandava army worried and followed too.

His brothers were confused.  "Where are you going, brother?" they asked. "Why are you leaving your armor and weapons?  Why are you walking towards the enemy alone?"

Yudhishthira didn't answer.  Krishna smiled and said, "He's going to greet the enemy leaders, Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, and Salya.  It's a sign of respect, and it will help us win."

The Kaurava army (the enemy) laughed.  They said, "Yudhishthira is scared! He's going to ask for help!"  But they soon quieted down, curious to see what would happen.

Yudhishthira walked right up to Bhishma, a powerful warrior, and touched his feet to show respect.  "We will fight you," he said. "Please give us your blessing."

Bhishma said, "I'm forced to fight for the Kauravas because they gave me lots of gifts. But I'm glad you showed me respect. Fight bravely, and you will win." He then admitted he was unbeatable in battle.

Yudhishthira asked, "How can we defeat you?"

Bhishma replied, "I don't know anyone who can defeat me. It's not my time to die yet."

Yudhishthira then went to Drona, another great warrior, and asked him the same question. Drona also said he was unbeatable but was forced to fight for the Kauravas and offered similar words of respect.  Drona told Yudhishthira that to defeat him, they would need to kill him when he was not fighting and was meditating.

Next, Yudhishthira visited Kripa and Salya, who also said the same thing: They were bound by gifts and loyalty to the Kauravas but respected Yudhishthira’s act and wished him well.

Krishna then went to Karna, a strong warrior on the Kaurava side, and tried to get him to switch sides.  But Karna refused, saying he was loyal to Duryodhana.

Then, Yuyutsu, one of Dhritarashtra's sons, decided to join the Pandavas.  He was tired of his brothers' evil ways.

Yudhishthira was very happy.  He put on his armor again, and the Pandava army prepared for battle. Everyone was excited to see what would happen next! They cheered again!  Even people from faraway lands were moved by Yudhishthira’s actions and wept with joy. The great battle was about to begin!
