King Dhritarashtra was very sad.  He was talking to his advisor, Sanjaya.  Sanjaya told Dhritarashtra he was a great king, wise and strong. He told him to be brave and not give up hope.

But Dhritarashtra was heartbroken. His best warrior, Karna, was dead. Karna was so strong, like a giant tree! He fought bravely, shooting many arrows. He was like a powerful god, but he fell in battle, like a tree struck by lightning.

Dhritarashtra felt like he was drowning in a huge ocean of sorrow. He couldn't see the end of his sadness. He missed Karna terribly.  He thought Karna's death was impossible to believe.  He felt his heart was as hard as rock, it didn't even break.  He wondered why he was still alive after hearing such terrible news.

He said, "My life is awful now! I have no friends. I am weak and everyone feels sorry for me. I used to be honored, but now my enemies have won. Bhishma, Drona, and Karna are all dead.  Karna was like a strong raft that kept my sons safe, and now he's gone!"

Dhritarashtra was worried about his other sons.  He wondered if they were all safe.  His son Duryodhana had ignored good advice from Yudhishthira. Even Bhishma had begged Duryodhana to make peace, but he didn't listen.

Dhritarashtra said, "Duryodhana was foolish! He didn't listen to anyone.  Now he's probably very sad too!  He wanted to win, but fate decided otherwise.  Everything we planned went wrong."

He kept asking Sanjaya about the battle. He wanted to know what happened to his other sons, like Duhshasana.  He wondered if they died bravely.  He asked about other important warriors, like what happened to Shakuni, Kritavarma, Ashwatthama, Kripa, and Shalya. He wanted to know everything about Karna's death, who fought with him, and how he was defeated. He wanted to know why such a strong warrior like Karna, who was almost like a god, was killed.

Dhritarashtra felt hopeless. He thought his whole army was lost because all his best leaders were dead. He was very sad and didn't know what to do.  He just wanted to understand how it all ended.
