Once upon a time, during a great battle, a brave warrior named Satyaki, who was very strong, fought against Bhagadatta.  Bhagadatta was a powerful archer.  They shot many arrows at each other!  Satyaki was hit many times, but he kept smiling and fighting!  Bhagadatta then threw a super strong, shiny spear!  But Satyaki cleverly cut it in half with his arrows.

Then, Duryodhana, the prince on the other side, saw Satyaki was surrounded by his soldiers.  Duryodhana wanted to defeat Satyaki. He told his brothers, "We must stop Satyaki! If we defeat him, we win the whole war!"  So, many soldiers attacked Satyaki all at once.

At the same time, another brave warrior, Abhimanyu, fought against a king. Abhimanyu was very skilled and shot many arrows! Another warrior, Sudakshina, shot arrows at Abhimanyu to help the other side.  It was a very tough battle!

Two old, wise warriors, Virata and Drupada, fought against Aswatthaman. Aswatthaman shot lots of arrows, but Virata and Drupada were very brave and protected themselves.

Sahadeva, another warrior, fought against Kripa. They kept shooting arrows at each other. Sahadeva broke Kripa’s bow, then Kripa got a new one and continued fighting!  

Vikarna and Nakula fought too. They shot many arrows back and forth, all for their teams!

Ghatotkacha fought Durmukha. Ghatotkacha hit Durmukha hard, but Durmukha fought back bravely!

Dhrishtadyumna fought against Kritavarman.  They were both strong and fought very hard.

Bhima fought Bhurisravas.  Bhurisravas shot a sharp arrow at Bhima’s chest, but Bhima kept fighting! They kept shooting arrows at each other in an amazing display!

Yudhishthira, the king, fought against Drona, who had a very loud chariot.  Drona’s army was so big and strong that Yudhishthira couldn’t move forward.

Chekitana and Chitrasena fought hard against each other, too.

Arjuna, the greatest warrior, fought against Dussasana, who was trying hard to protect their side.  Arjuna was so strong that he pushed many enemies back!  The battle was fierce and full of amazing fighting!
