Once upon a time, during a great war, a brave warrior named Karna charged into battle!  He was surrounded by his army – lots and lots of soldiers, elephants, and horses.  He fought fiercely, cutting down many enemy soldiers with his sharp arrows.  They fell to the ground like trees in a forest being chopped down.

Some soldiers ran away, but others, led by a strong warrior named Satyaki, tried to stop Karna.  But Karna was too strong! He defeated them easily.  He kept charging towards King Yudhishthira, the good king of the Pandavas.

Yudhishthira saw Karna coming.  He was angry!  He shouted, "Karna, you always fight against us! Show me your best today!" Then Yudhishthira shot ten strong arrows at Karna.

Karna, a super strong fighter himself, didn’t give up! He shot ten arrows back at Yudhishthira.  Yudhishthira got very angry and shot a powerful arrow. This arrow hit Karna hard, and he fell to the ground for a moment!  The Kurus (Karna's side) cried out in worry. The Pandavas (Yudhishthira's side) cheered.

But Karna was tough! He stood back up.  He even killed two of Yudhishthira’s best friends!  Yudhishthira shot many more arrows.  Then many of Yudhishthira’s other friends joined the fight against Karna.  They shot so many arrows that it looked like a dark cloud of arrows!

Karna used his magic weapon to fight back. He even broke Yudhishthira's bow!  He then cut off Yudhishthira's armor. But Yudhishthira threw a strong spear at Karna. Karna broke the spear with his arrows.  Yudhishthira then attacked Karna with spears, and Karna fought back and hurt Yudhishthira.  He even broke his chariot!  Yudhishthira had to run away!

Karna almost caught him, but remembered something his mother had said. He let Yudhishthira go. Then, he went back to fighting Yudhishthira's army.  Yudhishthira, seeing his army being beaten, got angry and told his soldiers to fight harder.  The battle raged on!  There were lots of shouts, crashes, and the ground was covered with dead soldiers and animals.  Blood flowed like a river. It was a terrible, messy battle!

Finally, Karna’s army got scared and ran away, just like a herd of elephants running from a lion. The Pandavas had won this part of the battle!
