Once upon a time, in a land far away, there was a great time of trouble.  King Yudhishthira was worried.  Everything was bad!  People were mean to each other.  Robbers stole everything.  There was no rain, and everyone was starving.  The good people were sad.  Even the wise priests couldn't do their prayers.  Yudhishthira asked his wise grandfather, Bhishma, "How can good people survive such terrible times?"

Bhishma said, "The king is responsible for the good times and bad times.  But even in hard times, good people must be wise."  Bhishma told Yudhishthira a story.

Long ago, during a terrible twelve-year drought, even the wise Rishi Viswamitra was starving!  He was so hungry he wandered for days.  Finally, he found a small village of Chandals – people who did jobs that others thought were unclean.  The village was smelly and full of bones.  Viswamitra, very hungry, could find no food.

He saw a piece of dog meat.  He thought, "Stealing is wrong, but I'm dying! Maybe stealing is okay when you’re starving?"

He tried to steal the meat, but the Chandala woke up!  Viswamitra, ashamed, explained his hunger.

The Chandala said, "Dog meat is unclean.  A wise person like you shouldn’t eat it."

Viswamitra argued, "Great saints have done worse things when hungry! I need to live to do good things again!"

The Chandala said, "Eating dog meat won't help you. It’s wrong, but I can't let you starve.  Take it, but know that it's wrong."

Viswamitra took the meat.  He cooked it carefully, like he was making a special offering to the gods. He prayed and then ate it.  Later, he did many good things to make up for what he did.

Bhishma told Yudhishthira, "Even a wise person might have to do something wrong to stay alive.  The most important thing is to live, so you can be good again later."  He said that good people should use their brains to stay alive, even if it means doing something that doesn't seem right at first.  Life is important; being good is important; and being alive lets you be good!
