King Dhritarashtra asked, "Sanjaya, after the brave Bhurisravas died, what happened next in the battle?"

Sanjaya answered, "Great warrior Arjuna wanted to defeat Jayadratha before sunset.  He made a promise to do this!  He urged his friend Krishna, "Krishna, drive faster! I need to reach Jayadratha. The sun is setting!"

Arjuna's chariot sped towards Jayadratha.  But Duryodhana, Karna, and many other Kuru warriors rushed to protect Jayadratha.  Arjuna glared at them, his eyes full of anger.

Duryodhana told Karna, "Karna, Arjuna is going to kill Jayadratha!  Stop him! If the sun sets before Jayadratha is defeated, Arjuna will lose, and we win!  If Arjuna fails, his brothers will be very sad and we will rule the kingdom!"

Karna said, "My body hurts from Bhimasena's arrows.  But I will fight for you. As long as I fight, Arjuna won't kill Jayadratha.  Victory is up to fate, but I'll do my best."

While they talked, Arjuna began to fight. He used his sharp arrows to cut down enemy soldiers and elephants.  He was like a fire, burning through the Kuru army. He quickly reached Jayadratha.

Many Kuru warriors surrounded Arjuna to protect Jayadratha.  They shot many arrows, but Arjuna was very skilled and cut them all in half.  Aswatthaman, Karna, and many others fought bravely, but Arjuna was too strong.

Karna fought bravely against Arjuna, Bhimasena, and Krishna.  Arjuna and the others shot many arrows at Karna, and Karna shot back even more arrows!  It was a huge battle.

Arjuna finally shot a powerful arrow that would have killed Karna, but Aswatthaman cut it in half.  Karna got a new bow and kept fighting.  Arjuna and Karna were like two angry bulls, shooting arrows at each other.

Then Arjuna cleverly shot four arrows at Karna's chariot.  He destroyed the chariot and killed the charioteer!  Karna was left without a chariot, stunned and helpless.  Aswatthaman helped him onto his chariot, and the battle continued.

More Kuru warriors fought Arjuna, but he was incredibly strong.  He even used a powerful magic weapon.   The sky was filled with flying arrows, and the ground was covered in dead soldiers.  Arjuna was like a god of war, and he kept fighting to win the kingdom.
