Once upon a time, in the land of Bharat, a good king named Yudhishthira had a question. He went to his wise grandfather, Bhishma, for answers.  Yudhishthira was puzzled about how to share his father's wealth fairly.  His father, a Brahmin priest, had married women from different groups of people: Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaisya, and Sudra.

Bhishma, the wise old man, explained that a Brahmin priest *should* only marry Brahmin women.  But sometimes, they married women from other groups.  Bhishma said that a Brahmin who married a Sudra woman wouldn't get a good place in heaven and would need to do special prayers to make things right.

Then, Bhishma explained how the father's wealth would be shared:

* The son from the Brahmin wife got the best bull, the nicest car, and four out of ten equal parts of the rest of the wealth.
* The son from the Kshatriya wife got three parts.
* The son from the Vaisya wife got two parts.
* The son from the Sudra wife, sadly, only got one part out of kindness, because the scriptures said he shouldn't inherit anything.

Yudhishthira was still confused.  "But grandfather," he asked, "all the sons from the Brahmin, Kshatriya, and Vaisya wives are Brahmin, aren't they? Why aren't their shares equal?"

Bhishma explained that even though all three were Brahmin, the wife from the Brahmin group was the most important.  Her son got the best share because his mother was of highest standing.  The Kshatriya wife's son was next, and the Vaisya wife's son got the smallest share of the three.

Bhishma continued explaining the rules for the Kshatriya and Vaisya men.  A Kshatriya man could have two wives (Kshatriya and Vaisya), and sometimes a third from the Sudra group, though it wasn't proper. His wealth would be shared among his sons – the son of the Kshatriya wife would get the most, followed by the Vaisya wife's son, and lastly the Sudra wife's son (only if the father gave it to him).

A Vaisya man should only marry a Vaisya woman, but sometimes he married a Sudra woman too.  If he did, the son from the Vaisya wife would receive a larger share than the son of the Sudra wife (again, only if the father wished it).

Finally, Bhishma told Yudhishthira that a Sudra man should only have one wife, from his own group.  All his sons would share the wealth equally.

Bhishma also said that the oldest son always got a little extra, no matter which group his mother was from. The older you are, the bigger the share of the family wealth you get.

So, Yudhishthira learned the rules of sharing wealth, which showed how people were valued differently based on their family group.  It was a complex system, but Bhishma helped him understand.
