Once upon a time, a prince named Janamejaya asked a wise storyteller, Sauti, about a strange story from the Mahabharata. He had heard about a powerful god, Vishnu, who had appeared in a very unusual form.

This form had a horse's head!  Janamejaya wanted to know why Vishnu took this form and what happened.  Sauti said he’d tell the story, just like Vaisampayana had told it to Janamejaya’s father long ago.  It’s a very old story, Sauti said, and it's true.

The story goes way back to the very beginning of everything.  The great god Narayana, who is everywhere and is the creator of the universe,  is also the inner soul of all things.  Sometimes he has special powers, and sometimes he doesn't.

Everything started from the Unmanifest, a kind of darkness, and then Brahma, the creator god, appeared from it.  Brahma was born from a lotus flower that grew out of Narayana.  Brahma started to create the world, but two bad guys, Madhu and Kaitabha, stole the sacred Vedas (holy books).

Brahma was very sad. He had lost his most important thing, his ‘eyes.’ He prayed to Narayana for help. Brahma praised Narayana, calling him the great creator, the one who has always existed and will always exist.

Narayana was sleeping, but Brahma's prayers woke him. Narayana wanted to help.  To get the Vedas back, he used his magic and changed into a giant! He had a horse's head, and his body was made of the whole universe – the sky was his crown, rivers were his hips, the sun and moon were his eyes!  It was a breathtaking sight!

With his powerful horse-head form, Narayana's voice boomed through the world. He used his loud, clear voice to sing the Vedas, and Madhu and Kaitabha heard it. The bad guys went to find the source of the sound.  While they were searching, Narayana took back the Vedas. He then gave them back to Brahma.

The two bad guys, Madhu and Kaitabha, were very angry. They found Narayana sleeping on a giant snake. They woke him up, and a great battle began!  Narayana, the powerful god, fought and defeated them. That's why he is also called Madhusudana, "the killer of Madhu".

After that, Brahma created the world again. He had the Vedas back, and Narayana had helped him. Narayana then left and returned to his usual form, but his horse-head form remained in the ocean, a reminder of his great power.

That’s the story of Vishnu's horse-headed form! It teaches us that even gods have to fight to do what's right, and that even the greatest of gods need to use their powers wisely.
