Once upon a time, there was a very beautiful young woman named Sruvavati. She was the daughter of a wise holy man named Bharadwaja.  Sruvavati wanted to marry Indra, the king of the gods!

To do this, she went to a special place called Vadarapachana, where many holy people lived.  There, she prayed and did very, very hard things to please Indra. She did this for many, many years.

One day, Indra came to her, but he looked like another holy man named Vasishtha.  Sruvavati served him, but she said, "I'm trying to marry Indra! I won't marry anyone else."

Indra smiled. He knew how hard she was trying. He said, "I know what you want.  Everything is possible if you are very dedicated and do hard things.  Try this: boil these five jujubes (small fruits)." Then Indra went away.

Sruvavati wanted to please Indra very much. She tried and tried to cook the jujubes, but they wouldn't cook! She used all the wood for her fire.  Then, she did something amazing. To make sure the jujubes cooked, she started putting her own feet into the fire!  She didn't even cry out from the pain.  She just kept trying.

Indra, watching from above, was so happy with Sruvavati's dedication. He showed himself and said, "You are amazing! Your wish will come true! You will marry me and live in heaven!" He also made Vadarapachana a very special and holy place.

Indra told Sruvavati about another amazing woman named Arundhati. Arundhati had also done something amazing a long time ago.  When her husband and his friends went to get food, a terrible drought lasted for twelve years!  Arundhati cooked some jujubes to honor a holy man, and during that time, the drought magically ended as she listened to him. Because of her devotion, that place also became holy.

Indra was so pleased with Sruvavati, that he even made Vadarapachana even more special than Arundhati's place. He said whoever spends just one night there will be rewarded.

Then, Sruvavati died and went to live with Indra in heaven.  Flowers fell from the sky, and everyone celebrated.

Later, someone asked, "How was Sruvavati born?"  It turned out that her father, Bharadwaja, had found a special seed.  He put it in a leaf cup, and Sruvavati was born!  He gave her the name Sruvavati, and she grew up in his holy place.
