Once upon a time, in the great battle of Kurukshetra, a terrible thing happened.  Karna's son, Vrishasena, was killed!  Karna was very sad and angry. His eyes turned red like hot coals.  He wanted revenge!

He roared and challenged Arjuna (also called Dhananjaya) to a fight.  Their chariots, shining bright like the sun, clashed together.  They were like two suns in the sky! Both had white horses and were amazing warriors. Everyone watching was amazed – it was like watching the gods fight!

The battlefield roared with noise!  Chariots crashed, bows twanged, arrows flew, and warriors shouted like lions. Karna's flag showed an elephant's rope, and Arjuna's showed a monkey.  All the kings cheered them on, clapping and shouting.  Thousands of soldiers were excited, too!  They cheered for their favorite warrior.

Karna and Arjuna were almost exactly alike!  They had strong bodies, white horses, golden necklaces, and bows that flashed like lightning. Both wore armor and carried many weapons. They looked like angry bulls, ready to charge! They were ready to fight to the death.

The whole world seemed to hold its breath!  The gods, the demons, even animals and plants, took sides! Some cheered for Karna, others for Arjuna.  It was a huge battle, even before the two warriors clashed!  The gods themselves argued about who would win.

Even the sun god, Surya (Karna's father) and Indra (Arjuna's friend and protector), argued!  Surya wanted Karna to win, but Indra wanted Arjuna to win.  Finally, the great god Brahma said that Arjuna, and his friend Krishna, would win.  Brahma explained that Arjuna was a good and truthful warrior, who had done many great deeds, and deserved to be victorious. He also said that Karna was a brave warrior and would go to heaven after the battle.  

Everyone heard Brahma's decision. The gods and demons were happy that the world wouldn't be destroyed in this epic battle.

Then, the two warriors clashed! Their chariots rattled, and their flags, each a symbol of power, fought each other as much as the warriors did.  Karna and Arjuna looked at each other and were ready to fight.

Arjuna, confident in Krishna's power, told Krishna he would easily defeat Karna. He knew he would win, just as Krishna knew what the outcome would be.  The mighty battle began!
