Once upon a time, a king named Yudhishthira asked his wise grandfather, Bhishma, a very important question.  He wanted to know about goodness (Virtue), riches (Wealth), and happiness (Pleasure).  Which was most important? Where did they come from? And what happened because of them?

Bhishma explained that goodness, riches, and happiness could all be together.  Riches usually came from being good. Happiness came from riches.  But they all started with *will* – wanting to do something.  We want things to be happy. To escape all wanting is to be free!

Goodness protects us, riches help us be good, and happiness is just enjoying things.  They are all linked to our feelings. If we want them to lead to a good afterlife, that’s a long-term goal. But if we want them to help us understand ourselves, that's much closer. We shouldn't throw them away unless we're truly wise and have worked hard to become free from all earthly desires.

Bhishma said it's tricky though!  Goodness doesn't always bring riches. Sometimes we get rich by luck or hard work, and sometimes riches cause problems. Sometimes we become good because of things like praying.

Only someone really smart can understand all of this. If you want riches and goodness but only care about the rewards, it's not true goodness or riches.  True riches aren’t about hoarding it. True goodness isn’t about getting a reward.

Then Bhishma told Yudhishthira a story about a king named Angaristha and a wise man named Kamandaka. Angaristha asked Kamandaka how to fix mistakes.

Kamandaka said that only seeking happiness without being good or rich leads to trouble.  If you’re not good and wise, you lose your goodness and riches.  Then you become wicked!  A wicked king makes his people scared.  Nobody likes a wicked king! They’ll leave him and he’ll be unhappy and alone.

To be a good king, Kamandaka said, Angaristha should study holy books, respect wise people, be fair, marry well, and always be kind. He should get rid of bad people and surround himself with good people.  He should be kind and generous to everyone.  This way, he could fix his mistakes and become a great king.
