Once upon a time, during a big battle in the Mahabharata, King Dhritarashtra asked his advisor, Sanjaya, "What happened to Kripa and Kritavarma?  Did they run away when Drona's son, Ashvatthama, went to attack the Pandavas' camp?"

Sanjaya answered, "No, they waited! Ashvatthama was happy to see them. He whispered, 'With your help, we can defeat all the enemy warriors!  The Pandavas are asleep. I'll go in and attack like the god of death, Yama. You stop anyone from escaping!'"

Ashvatthama crept into the Pandava camp very quietly. He found Dhrishtadyumna, the Pandava leader, sleeping soundly in a comfy bed.  Ashvatthama kicked him awake!  Dhrishtadyumna saw Ashvatthama and tried to fight back, but Ashvatthama was too strong. He pushed Dhrishtadyumna to the ground and kicked him until he died.

Dhrishtadyumna's guards and wives woke up, but they were too scared to do anything. Ashvatthama jumped into his chariot and roared loudly, then went to find more enemies to fight.

The guards and wives cried when they saw their king was dead.  Other soldiers woke up and asked what happened.  The wives warned them about Ashvatthama.  He used a powerful weapon and killed them all. He then killed another Pandava leader, Uttamauja, in the same way.  Yudhamanyu tried to fight Ashvatthama, but he was also killed.

Ashvatthama went on a rampage! He killed many sleeping soldiers.  He fought the sons of Draupadi and killed Prativindhya and Sutasoma.  He fought and killed Shatanika and Shrutakarma.  Even brave Shikhandi couldn't stop him. Ashvatthama killed Shikhandi too. He killed many, many more soldiers.  It was like a scary dream.

The Pandavas soldiers had dreamed about this night before the battle started! They saw a scary lady and Ashvatthama killing sleeping soldiers. Now, the dream was coming true.

Ashvatthama fought and fought until almost everyone was dead. The camp was filled with blood, and scary creatures came out to eat the dead bodies.  When morning came, Ashvatthama left the camp, covered in blood. He had kept his promise to Duryodhana.

Later, Ashvatthama met Kripa and Kritavarma who had also killed many soldiers at the camp gates. They were all very happy.

Dhritarashtra then asked, “Why didn't Ashvatthama do this before?”

Sanjaya said, "Because the strongest Pandava warriors weren't there.  Ashvatthama could only win because the soldiers were asleep.  No one could beat the Pandavas while their strongest warriors were awake."

So, Ashvatthama’s night of rage was over.  He had killed many Pandavas soldiers, but his victory was short-lived because it had come at a terrible cost.
