Yudhishthira asked his wise grandfather, Bhishma, "Grandpa, who should we respect the most?  Who deserves our bows and our best behavior?"

Bhishma smiled. "My dear Yudhishthira, I respect those who are very good and kind. They are wise and study the holy books.  They help their families. They are gentle and kind.  They are like graceful swans, speaking beautifully and wisely. They always speak good things.  They are happy and make others happy. Kings honor them and treat them well.  I also respect those who listen to wise people and treat them with respect. I really like people who give good food to those who need it. It's easy to be brave in battle, but being kind and generous is much harder and better.  There are many brave warriors, but a truly kind person is even greater. Even if I were a simple priest, I'd be proud to be truly good and kind! But priests who are kind and good and love to learn are the best. You, my dear Yudhishthira, are very dear to me.  But even more dear are the priests. I love them so much that I hope my goodness to them will help me go to a happy place after I die.  My family is important, but priests are even more important. I don't expect anything in return for being kind to them – I do it because it's right.

Because of my kindness to priests, I have no pain, even though I am hurt. People called me 'the friend of priests,' and I loved that. Helping priests is the best thing you can do. I see a beautiful place waiting for me because of my kindness to them. Soon I’ll go there.

Women should respect their husbands. Husbands are very important to them. Priests are like husbands to kings. Even if a king is very old and a young priest is very young, the priest is still more important. The earth chose kings to rule because it didn't have a priest to rule it. Priests should be protected and honored like our fathers and teachers. We should treat them as carefully as we treat our sacred fires. Priests are usually gentle and honest. They are always kind. But, if they get angry, they’re as dangerous as poisonous snakes! So it's important to always respect them.

We should also fear two things: power and hard work. These things can hurt us. Hard work is better though. Angry priests with lots of hard work can beat anyone, no matter how powerful they are! If power and hard work fight, they’ll both lose, but hard work is stronger.

Kings should always protect priests, like a shepherd protects his sheep.  They should make sure priests have what they need, just like a father takes care of his children."
