King Dhritarashtra, Sanjaya told the king, “This bad thing happened because of your mistakes. You saw the Kauravas were being unfair to the Pandavas, but you didn’t stop them.  Because of you, they gambled and lost, and now there’s this big war. You’ll have to face the results of your actions, both now and later.  But be calm, and listen to what happened in the battle.”

Bhima, a very strong Pandava warrior, smashed through the Kaurava army. He saw Duryodhana’s brothers – Dussasana, Durvisaha, and many more – and got really angry. He charged right into the army, even though Bhishma was protecting it.  All the Kaurava warriors shouted, “Let’s kill him!”  Bhima was surrounded, but he wasn't scared. He was brave like the sun, even surrounded by enemies. Thousands of arrows flew at him, but Bhima kept fighting, killing many soldiers on chariots, elephants, and horses. He decided to kill all his cousins. He jumped off his chariot, grabbed his big club, and started smashing the Kaurava army!

Meanwhile, Dhrishtadyumna, another Pandava warrior, left his fight and rushed to where Bhima had been. He found Bhima’s empty chariot. He was very worried. Bhima’s driver, Visoka, explained, “Bhima went deep into the Kaurava army to fight those who wanted to kill him. He told me to wait.”  Dhrishtadyumna said, “I can't leave Bhima!  I have to help him.” He went looking for Bhima. He found Bhima fighting like a storm, destroying everything in his path.

The Kauravas surrounded Bhima and shot lots of arrows at him. Dhrishtadyumna rushed to Bhima, pulled out the arrows, and helped him. Then the Kauravas saw them together and decided to attack both of them. They fired many arrows, but Dhrishtadyumna was very strong and didn’t give up. He used a magic weapon that made the Kauravas dizzy and confused, and they ran away!

Then Drona, a great Kaurava warrior, saw what happened. He shot three arrows at Dhrishtadyumna’s father, Drupada, who left the battle. Drona blew his horn, and all the Kaurava soldiers felt scared. Drona found his sons still dizzy from the magic weapon, so he used another magic weapon to cancel the first one out. The Kauravas then attacked Bhima and Dhrishtadyumna again.

Yudhishthira, the Pandava king, worried about Bhima and Dhrishtadyumna, sent twelve strong warriors, led by Abhimanyu, to help them.  They charged into the Kauravas.  The Kauravas were scared of Bhima and confused by Dhrishtadyumna, so they couldn't stop them. Dhrishtadyumna, seeing his teacher Drona coming, decided to stop fighting the Kaurava princes. He got Bhima safely onto another chariot, and then he attacked Drona. Drona, very angry, broke Dhrishtadyumna’s bow. He then killed his horses and charioteer. Dhrishtadyumna jumped to Abhimanyu’s chariot, and continued fighting. Drona then fought back, and the battle raged on.  Drona’s fighting scared the Pandava army, and the Kauravas were very happy.
