The great war raged!  King Dhritarashtra asked his advisor, Sanjaya, "What did Bhima do in the middle of all that fighting?"

Sanjaya said, "Bhima's chariot was broken.  Angry and upset because Karna kept teasing him—calling him names like 'silly', 'greedy', and 'bad fighter'—Bhima asked Arjuna for help.  Bhima reminded Arjuna of their promise to each other.  He said, 'Arjuna, help me so that I can keep my promise!'"

Arjuna, a very strong warrior, went to Karna. "Karna," he said, "you're a cheat! You boast too much! In battle, you can win or lose.  Even the great god Indra can lose! Yuyudhana broke your chariot, and you almost died. I could have killed you then, but I didn't because of my promise. But it was wrong to insult Bhima!  True heroes don't brag after winning. You were even defeated by Bhima many times, yet he never insulted you!  Because you were mean to Bhima, and you killed Abhimanyu when I wasn't looking, I will kill you today!"

Arjuna promised to kill Karna's son and then many other warriors. A huge, scary noise filled the battlefield.  The sun hid behind a hill.  Krishna, Arjuna's friend and advisor, said, "Arjuna, you kept your promise! You killed Karna's son, and no one else in the whole world could fight this army as well as you!"

Krishna told Arjuna, “You are as strong as the god Rudra! You are the best warrior!" Arjuna said, "This is all thanks to you, Krishna!  Because of your help, Yudhishthira will win!" Krishna smiled.

Then Krishna showed Arjuna the battlefield.  It was a terrible sight!  Many kings lay dead or dying.  Their chariots, horses, and elephants were broken.  The ground was covered with weapons, jewels, and blood.  Even the elephants looked like mountains bleeding.  Dead soldiers and animals lay everywhere.  The battlefield looked like a horrible, beautiful mess.  Krishna said, "Only you, Arjuna, or Indra, the king of the gods, could have done this!"

Krishna blew his horn, and the Pandava army cheered.  Then he went to Yudhishthira and told him that Karna's son was dead.
