Once upon a time, in the land of Bharat, a wise man named Vyasa told a story about how to make up for doing bad things.  He said if someone did something wrong, they could become good again!

Vyasa said, "If you do something bad, but then you’re really sorry and you do good things, you can become clean again. You could give things away, pray a lot, and help others.  You could eat only one small meal a day, and only what you found yourself. You could even walk around with a skull and a stick for twelve whole years! If you did all that, you could become good again, even if you did something really bad like hurting a holy person."

He explained lots of other ways to become good again, too.  "You could jump into a fire three times! Or walk really, really far while saying holy words. Or give all your stuff away to someone who needed it.  You could even give away lots and lots of cows!"

Vyasa said there were many ways to be cleansed of bad deeds.  "Giving away a hundred thousand cows, or even just a thousand at the very end of your life, makes everything better.  Giving away special horses also helps!  Or, if you gave everything someone asked for and never bragged about it, that would help too!"

He even talked about other ways to become good again, like falling off a big mountain, or jumping into a big fire!  He said if you did something bad and then felt very sorry and gave land to others, that would be good too.  Even women could become good again by being good for a whole year!

Vyasa explained that some bad things were easier to fix than others.  Small mistakes were easier to make right than really big ones.  He said it was important to try your best to always do what is good.

Then Vyasa said something important to the King Yudhishthira. "King," he said, "you fought in a war to protect your people. That was good.  You did your job! If you still feel bad, then you can do some of those things to make it better, but don’t be too hard on yourself.”

Yudhishthira thought about what Vyasa had said and then he talked to him some more.  That’s how the story goes!
