The sun was setting behind the Asta hills.  The sky was dusty and hot.  The battle was still raging! Some soldiers rested, some kept fighting.  Arjuna and Krishna, his best friend, were heading towards the king of the Sindhus.

Arjuna's arrows cleared a path through the enemy soldiers.  His chariot, pulled by super-fast horses, zoomed through the battlefield!  It was so fast, even the sun god's chariot couldn't go that quick!  Arjuna's arrows, sharp and strong, flew far and killed many enemies. They were like fire!

Two brave brothers, Vinda and Anuvinda, saw Arjuna's tired horses.  They attacked! They shot lots of arrows at Arjuna, Krishna, and the horses.  But Arjuna, very angry, shot back! He used nine special arrows, and they hit the brothers right in their weak spots.

Vinda and Anuvinda got mad and shot many arrows at Arjuna and Krishna.  Arjuna, super-strong, broke their bows with just two arrows!  They got new bows, but Arjuna broke those too!  Then, he killed their horses and soldiers. He cut off Vinda's head with one arrow – whoosh!

Anuvinda, now very upset, attacked Krishna with a big club.  Krishna didn't even move, he was as strong as a mountain!  Arjuna then shot six arrows and cut Anuvinda into pieces!

The enemy soldiers attacked Arjuna, but he fought them all off. He was like a fire in the forest!  Arjuna was tired, his horses were hurt, and they still had far to go to reach the king of the Sindhus.

"Krishna," Arjuna said, "my horses are tired.  What should we do?"

Krishna agreed that they needed a rest.

Arjuna got out of his chariot. He stood strong and brave, like a mountain. The enemy soldiers attacked him all at once. They shot many arrows, but Arjuna fought them all off. The battle was so intense, sparks flew everywhere!

Krishna said, "Arjuna, the horses are thirsty.  There's no water here."

Arjuna, super-smart, used a magic arrow to make a big lake! The lake was beautiful, full of water, birds, and flowers.  A wise man, Narada, even came to see it!  Arjuna then built a cool house using only arrows!  Krishna was so happy, he said, "Amazing, Arjuna, amazing!"
