Once upon a time, Prince Janamejaya and his three brothers were having a big, important ceremony called a sacrifice.  Suddenly, a little puppy, the son of a magical dog named Sarama, came running by.  Janamejaya’s brothers playfully hit the puppy.  The puppy ran away crying to his mom.

Sarama, the puppy's mom, asked him why he was crying. The puppy said Janamejaya's brothers hurt him.  Sarama said he must have done something wrong.  The puppy said he didn't! He didn't even look at the special butter used in the sacrifice.

Sarama was very angry. She went to Janamejaya and his brothers. She yelled, "You hurt my son for no reason! Bad things will happen to you!"

Janamejaya was scared.  After the ceremony, he went home and looked for a wise man, a Purohita, to help him avoid the bad things Sarama said would happen.

He found a wise man named Srutasrava, who had a son, Somasrava. Srutasrava said his son was perfect to help Janamejaya, but he was a little unusual. Somasrava had been born from a snake!  He could forgive any bad thing, except those done against a very powerful god.  And, Srutasrava warned, Somasrava gave anything away if someone asked nicely. Janamejaya said that was okay.

Janamejaya told his brothers to always obey Somasrava. Then he went to war and won!

Meanwhile, a different wise man named Ayoda-Dhaumya had three students: Upamanyu, Aruni, and Veda.  He told Aruni to fix a hole in a field’s water channel.  Aruni tried, but couldn't.  Finally, he got in the hole himself to stop the water!

Later, Ayoda-Dhaumya found Aruni. He was so happy that Aruni tried so hard, he gave Aruni a new name: Uddalaka, which means "he who got up from the ditch."

Next, Ayoda-Dhaumya told Upamanyu to watch the cows. Upamanyu was very good at it, always plump and healthy.  Ayoda-Dhaumya asked how he was so healthy, even though he gave all his begged food to his teacher.  Upamanyu said he begged again. Then, Ayoda-Dhaumya said that wasn’t fair, so Upamanyu drank cow's milk.  Then, Ayoda-Dhaumya said that wasn't allowed either, so Upamanyu drank the froth the baby cows left behind when they drank milk.  Finally, really hungry, Upamanyu ate some poisonous plant leaves and went blind and fell into a hole!

Upamanyu prayed to the twin gods, the Aswins, for help.  They gave him a magical cake to cure his blindness. But Upamanyu refused to eat it until he gave some to his teacher first! The Aswins were so impressed they gave him even better sight and gold teeth!

Ayoda-Dhaumya’s third student, Veda, was very good and obedient. He served his teacher for a very long time and became very wise.  He had his own students later, but he was always kind and didn’t make them work too hard.

One day, Janamejaya asked Veda to be his teacher.  While Veda was away, he left his student Utanka in charge. Some of Veda’s wives tricked Utanka into doing something wrong, but he refused.  When Veda returned, he was very pleased with Utanka’s honesty.

Veda asked Utanka what he wanted as a gift. Utanka said he wanted to get Veda something nice. Veda told him to ask Veda's wife. She asked Utanka to get the Queen’s earrings from King Paushya.

On his way, a giant man on a giant bull told Utanka to eat the bull's dung. Utanka did as he was told. This made him special!

Utanka asked King Paushya for the earrings. The king sent him to the Queen, but Utanka was too dirty. Utanka cleaned himself properly, and then the Queen gave him the earrings.

On his way back, a beggar stole the earrings. It was really Takshaka, the snake king who had killed Janamejaya’s father! Utanka chased Takshaka into the underworld. He called upon the gods for help, and Takshaka gave back the earrings in fear.

Utanka rushed to give the earrings to his teacher. He explained his adventure. His teacher explained the symbolism of everything he saw.

Utanka then told Janamejaya to take revenge on Takshaka for killing his father by performing a special ceremony to destroy him. Janamejaya, very angry, agreed. And that is how Utanka's story and this part of the Mahabharata ends.
