Once upon a time, a wise man named Saunaka talked to King Janamejaya.  The king felt very sad and worried. Saunaka said, "You're strong and clever, and you want to be a good king.  Kings are sometimes strict, but then they become kind and help everyone. That's amazing!"

Saunaka explained that being very strict can hurt people.  But Janamejaya had changed. He'd stopped eating fancy foods and spent lots of time praying and being good.  This was amazing to other kings who weren't so good.  It's easy to be generous if you have lots of things, but it's even better to be generous even if you don't have much.  Being wise helps you make good choices.

Saunaka said five things make you a better person: giving gifts, being kind, studying holy books, telling the truth, and performing sacrifices. A sixth is hard work in prayer and good deeds. Visiting holy places is also good.  King Yayati had once said that old people should pray after a lifetime of doing good things.

The Kuru field was a holy place, and the Saraswati River was even holier.  The best place to visit was a lake called Prithudaka. If you bathed there, you wouldn’t die young.  Saunaka told Janamejaya to visit some other holy places too: Mahasaras, Pushkara, Prabhasa, and Lake Manasa. This would help him live longer.  It was even better to not want many things and just live a simple life. It's all in your mind whether something is good or bad. People who don't want much are the happiest.

Saunaka said the best thing for a king is to be strong and kind.  Janamejaya had been unkind to wise people, the Brahmanas, before. Now he should be nice to them, even if they were angry with him.  Kings can be different. Some are calm like snow, some are fierce like fire, some are strong like a plow, and some are fast like lightning.  Don't spend time with bad people.

If you do something wrong once, say sorry.  If you do it twice, promise never to do it again.  If you do it three times, decide to be good from now on.  If you do it lots of times, go visit a holy place. Good things make you good. Bad things make you bad. Praying and being good can clear away your mistakes.  If you kill something, save the same number of that kind of animal to balance it.

Even the gods asked for advice on being good.  A wise man named Vrihaspati said that if you do good things after doing bad things, you become good again, just like washing dirty clothes with soap. Don't brag about doing wrong. Be honest, and help others. Covering up the mistakes of good people also makes you good.  Doing good things is like the sun shining away darkness.

Then a helpful man helped Janamejaya do a special ceremony. The king felt much better and was happy again. He went back to his kingdom, a good king at last.
