Once upon a time, the wise Vyasa told a story.  He explained how the world was created. Then, he talked about what Brahmins (wise people) should do.

Brahmins study very hard.  They learn all about sacred things.  They live with their teacher and are very polite. After learning, they go home and choose a way to live.

They can get married and have families. Or, they can live alone and pray. They could live in the forest with their teacher. Or, they could travel and help others.  Having a family is the most important way to start.  If you're good and kind, you'll always succeed.

Brahmins have three important jobs: having children, learning about sacred things, and doing special ceremonies.  Doing these things pays off their special debts. Then, they can choose another way to live. They should live in a very special place and try to be famous. Brahmins become famous by praying a lot, being very smart, and giving gifts.  Good people go to a wonderful place after they die.  Their good deeds are remembered forever.

Brahmins teach others, learn themselves, and lead ceremonies. They don't take or give gifts without a good reason.  If they get money from helping others, their students, or their daughters' families, they should use it wisely. They should use this money for ceremonies or to give to others. They can't just keep it for themselves.

If a Brahmin has a family, they should give gifts to help others. They should give to gods, wise people, ancestors, teachers, the sick, the hungry, and anyone in need. They should even give more than they can afford to people who are struggling or learning. There’s nothing too good to give to someone who deserves it!

Many kings showed how great it is to help others.  One king gave his own life to save a Brahmin and went to heaven. Another gave only warm water, but that was enough to get him to heaven!  Many others gave away their riches, even their eyes, their sons, or their kingdoms! All because they helped Brahmins, they went to a wonderful place after they died.  Their stories are told even today.  They show us that being kind and generous is very important.
