The biggest battle ever was about to begin!  King Dhritarashtra asked his advisor, Sanjaya, "What happened when the armies faced each other?"

Sanjaya said, "The soldiers, all in shiny armor, waited. Their flags waved high.  Duryodhana, the king's son, told his army, 'Attack!'

Everyone charged! It was a super scary battle!  Elephants and chariots crashed together. Arrows flew everywhere!

The great warrior Bhishma, all in armor, started shooting arrows! He aimed at Arjuna, the Pandavas' best fighter, and many other heroes.  The Pandavas' army started to lose!

Arjuna saw Bhishma and shouted, "We need to stop him! He's destroying our army!"  His friend Krishna said, "Don't worry, I'll take you there!"

Krishna drove Arjuna's chariot right towards Bhishma. Arjuna's chariot was amazing—it shone like the sun and had a roaring monkey on its flag!  He fought bravely, shooting arrows at Bhishma’s army.

Bhishma fought back hard, helped by many other strong warriors like Drona and Karna.  Bhishma shot many arrows at Arjuna, and so did Drona, Kripa, Duryodhana, and others.  But Arjuna, strong as a mountain, didn't fall!

Arjuna shot back at Bhishma, Drona, and the others.  Other Pandava heroes like Satyaki, Virata, and Dhrishtadyumna joined the fight to help Arjuna.

Duryodhana, worried about his army, told Bhishma, "Arjuna and Krishna are too strong!  Even Karna, my best friend, isn't fighting them! You must stop Arjuna!"

Bhishma went to fight Arjuna directly.  Both armies cheered and blew their horns.  The battle between Arjuna and Bhishma was incredible!  They shot hundreds of arrows at each other!  It was so intense that the ground shook!

Neither Arjuna nor Bhishma could win. They were equally strong! The gods and other magical beings watched, amazed.  They said, "This battle is so amazing!  It's like nothing the world has ever seen!"

While Arjuna and Bhishma fought, other soldiers on both sides fought too, using swords, axes, and arrows. The battle between Drona and the Panchala prince was also fierce.  It was a terrible, bloody battle!
