Once upon a time, there was a powerful giant named Vritra.  He was very, very strong, a real bad guy!  One day, Vritra got a terrible fever.  His body shook! Flames came from his mouth!  His hair stood on end!  Even a scary jackal ran out of his mouth!  Bad things happened all around him:  meteors fell, and birds cried out.

Indra, the king of the gods, was very brave. He had a magic hammer called a thunderbolt. He saw Vritra and threw his thunderbolt at the giant.  *BOOM!*  Vritra fell down, defeated! The gods cheered!

But something bad happened. When Vritra died, a scary ghost called Brahmanicide came out of his body.  She was ugly and angry! She looked like a witch, covered in blood and wearing a necklace of skulls!  She was very, very mad and followed Indra, wanting to hurt him.

Brahmanicide scared Indra so much that he hid inside a lotus flower. But she still followed him!  Indra was very weak and scared. He went to the Grandfather God, Brahma, for help.  Brahma was kind and wanted to help Indra.  He asked Brahmanicide to leave.  She said she would if she got a new home.

Brahma was clever. He shared Brahmanicide's anger with others. He gave a piece to Agni (the god of fire), another to the trees and plants, another to the beautiful Apsaras (water nymphs), and the last piece to the waters of the earth.

Agni got his piece, but if someone refuses to offer him food as a sacrifice, then the badness would go into that person instead.  The trees and plants got their piece, but if someone cuts them down without respect, the badness would go to that person. The Apsaras got their piece, but if someone is mean to them, the badness will go to that person. And the waters got their piece, but if someone is disrespectful to them, throwing things into them, the badness will go into that person.

Finally, Brahmanicide left Indra alone. Indra was happy and powerful again. He performed a special ceremony, and he was completely clean!

The blood of Vritra turned into chickens.  These chickens are not good to eat, because they carry a little bit of that badness.

The story tells us to always be kind and respectful to everyone and everything!  If we are, we won't get the badness of Brahmanicide.  And if you tell this story, you'll be good and happy, too!
