Once upon a time, in the land of Bharat, Yudhishthira, a very wise king, spoke to his sister Draupadi.  He said, "Draupadi, anger is a terrible thing! It can cause both good and bad things to happen.  If you control your anger, good things will come your way. But if you let your anger take over, bad things will happen."

Yudhishthira explained, "Anger makes people do bad things. Angry people can hurt others, even their teachers! They might say mean things to important people.  An angry person can't think clearly. They might even kill someone who doesn't deserve it!  Anger is so powerful it can even hurt you inside."

He continued, "Wise people know this, so they try very hard to control their anger. They want to be happy and safe.  A weak person who gets angry at someone stronger will only hurt themselves. They might even lose their life and won't have a good afterlife."

Yudhishthira said, "Even if someone is mean to you, it's better to stay calm.  Forgiving others is much better than being angry. Being kind and gentle is always the best way. I know I need to fight Duryodhana, but I won't let anger control me.  True strength isn't about being angry; it's about being wise and calm. An angry person can't see things clearly."

He told Draupadi a story about a very wise man named Kashyapa. Kashyapa said forgiveness is the most important thing.  It's like magic!  Forgiveness makes the world a better place.  It brings peace and happiness.  People who forgive others will go to a wonderful place after they die.

Yudhishthira said, "Many important people – our grandfather, Krishna, our teacher, and even Vidura – all believe in peace. They all tell us to be calm. Our family has a big problem, and it may be hard.  Duryodhana doesn’t deserve to be king because he is not kind. I am calm, and I will forgive even though Duryodhana is mean, because that is the right thing to do."

Yudhishthira ended by saying, "Being calm and forgiving is always the best, even when things are difficult.  That is true strength!"
