Once upon a time, in a great battle, Duryodhana, the brave son of the king, fought like a mighty warrior!  He shot so many arrows that the ground was covered.  It was like a huge raincloud showering arrows everywhere!

No one on the Pandava side—not the soldiers, horses, elephants, or chariots—was safe!  Duryodhana's arrows flew everywhere. It looked like the whole battlefield was made of arrows! He was amazing! Even all the Pandavas together couldn't get close to him.

He hit Yudhishthira with 100 arrows, Bhima with 70, Sahadeva with 7, Nakula with 46, Dhrishtadyumna with 5, and the sons of Draupadi with 7.  He even broke Sahadeva's bow!

But the Pandavas fought back! Sahadeva got a new bow and hit Duryodhana with 10 arrows!  Nakula hit him with 9, Satyaki with 1, the sons of Draupadi with 37, and Yudhishthira with 5. Bhima hit him with a whopping 80 arrows!

Even with all those arrows hitting him, Duryodhana didn't give up! He was super strong and quick.  His friends saw him and came back to help, making a huge, loud noise like the ocean!

Then, there was a big fight between Bhima and Ashwatthama.  They were both very strong and fought so hard that they couldn't even see which way was north, south, east or west because of all the arrows flying around!

Shakuni fought Yudhishthira and broke his chariot. But Sahadeva saved Yudhishthira and took him away.  Yudhishthira came back and hit Shakuni with more arrows.

Nakula fought Uluka, and Kritavarma fought Satyaki.  Duryodhana and Dhrishtadyumna fought like two angry elephants.  The sons of Draupadi fought Kripa.

Everyone fought everyone! Soldiers fought soldiers, elephants fought elephants, horses fought horses, and chariots crashed into each other.  The battlefield was covered in dust and smoke from all the fighting. It was so dusty that you couldn't even see the warriors.  But then the dust settled, and you could see all the fighting again.  It was a really, really big battle!  The sounds of arrows hitting were like a whole forest burning down!
