Long ago, in a world full of magic, there was a great god named Brahman.  Brahman had six amazing sons, super-smart wise men called Rishis.  He also had another son named Sthanu.  Sthanu had eleven super strong sons!  These eleven sons were called the Rudras.

Then there was Angiras, one of Brahman’s Rishi sons.  Angiras had three sons who were very good at following rules. Atri, another Rishi, had many sons, all very wise. Pulastya's sons were different - they were Rakshasas (scary creatures!), monkeys, Kinnaras (half-man, half-horse!), and Yakshas (magical beings!). Pulaha's sons were even more surprising – they were insects, lions, tigers, bears, and wolves! Kratu's sons were friends with the sun god.

Brahman also had a toe!  From his right toe came Daksha, another very wise man.  From his left toe came Daksha's wife!  They had fifty daughters, all beautiful.  Daksha gave ten daughters to Dharma (Goodness), twenty-seven to Chandra (the Moon), and thirteen to Kasyapa. Dharma's wives all had wonderful names like Kirti (Fame) and Lakshmi (Wealth). The Moon's wives helped tell time – they were the stars!

Brahman also had a son named Manu, who had a son called Prajapati.  Prajapati had eight sons called the Vasus.  They had names like Dhara and Dhruva.  One Vasu's son was even called Time!  Another Vasu, Aha, had sons with cool names like Jyotih and Sama.  Agni, the fire god, had a son called Kartikeya, who was raised by some special ladies.

Then there was Dharma, who was Goodness himself!  He came out of Brahman's heart and had three sons: Sama (Peace), Kama (Desire), and Harsha (Joy).  They kept the world going!

Marichi, another Rishi, had a son named Kasyapa. Kasyapa had lots and lots of children!  Gods and demons came from him.  Aditi, another important person, had twelve sons, with Indra as the leader. One was Vishnu, who also helped the world.  All together, there were thirty-three important gods!

Bhrigu, another wise man, was also Brahman’s son. Bhrigu's son, Sukra, became a planet and helped everyone.  He even taught both gods and demons!  Bhrigu had another amazing son, Chyavana, who was born angry! Chyavana’s son had a son, and his son had a son named Rama, a very strong warrior.

Brahman had two more sons, Dhatri and Vidhatri. He also had a daughter, Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth!

Adharma, or Evil, was born when people started fighting over food.  He had a wife, Niriti, and they had mean children like Fear and Death.  Other powerful people had children who became birds and animals.  For example, one family had children that turned into crows, hawks, and parrots!


That's how the world got all its animals and important people!  Listening to this story cleanses your heart and makes you very wise!
