Once upon a time, in a great battle, Arjuna, a mighty warrior, shot a powerful arrow.  It zoomed through the sky, like a bright streak of lightning, destroying many of the enemy soldiers!

Karna, another brave warrior, wasn't going to let that happen. He fired many golden arrows, and *pow!* he stopped Arjuna's arrow!  Then Karna and Arjuna fought a super amazing battle!

They shot so many arrows that the sky was filled with a giant arrow-cloud!  You couldn't even see the sun!  It was like a huge, dark net of arrows.  Even the gods in the sky cheered for them, shouting, "Go Karna! Go Arjuna!"

While they fought, a sneaky snake named Aswasena watched.  Arjuna had hurt Aswasena's mom a long time ago, and he wanted revenge!  He slithered into Karna's quiver and hid inside an arrow.

Karna, not knowing about the sneaky snake, aimed his special arrow at Arjuna.  But before he could shoot, a wise king warned him, "That arrow won't work!"

Karna was proud.  He said, "I only shoot each arrow once!"  He fired the arrow anyway. The arrow, with Aswasena inside, zoomed toward Arjuna.  Arjuna was quick! He pushed his chariot into the ground, and the arrow only knocked off his crown.

Aswasena, now free, wanted to finish Arjuna. But Arjuna, angry, used six arrows to quickly kill the snake!

The battle continued!  Karna and Arjuna kept shooting arrows at each other, and at Krishna, Arjuna's friend who drove his chariot.  They hit each other many times, and the fighting was fierce.

Then, something bad happened to Karna.  A long time ago, a priest had put a curse on him.  Because of the curse, the earth started to swallow one of Karna’s chariot wheels!

His chariot wobbled, and Karna was in trouble. He was sad and angry. He said, "Goodness doesn't always help good people!"

Arjuna saw Karna struggling.  Krishna, his friend, told him to finish the fight.  But Arjuna hesitated. He knew that fighting a fallen enemy wasn't fair.  Krishna reminded him that in battle, there were no rules against defeating a weakened opponent.

Arjuna finally shot his arrows, and Karna was defeated. The battle was over.

The story shows us how even the strongest warriors can be beaten, and that even in a battle, there's a difference between winning and being fair.
