Once upon a time, a wise king named Yudhishthira asked his grandpa, Bhishma, a very important question: "Grandpa, which is best: religion, having lots of stuff, or having fun?"

Bhishma said, "I'll tell you a story!  Long ago, a poor priest wanted to be good and do important ceremonies.  He really wanted money to do this. So he prayed to the gods a lot. But he didn't get any money!"

The priest was sad. He thought, "Who else can I ask?" Then, he saw a big, amazing cloud named Kundadhara.  He thought, "Maybe this cloud can help!"  So he prayed to the cloud with incense, flowers, and other nice things.

The cloud was happy!  He said, "People can ask forgiveness for bad things like hurting others, drinking too much, or stealing. But there's no forgiveness for being ungrateful!"  He added, "Bad things like being mean, angry, greedy and not thankful lead to more bad things. But being ungrateful…that’s the worst. It doesn't create anything bad, it just *is* bad."


The priest went to sleep. Because he was so good and had prayed so hard, he had a special dream. He saw a shining, important person named Manibhadra giving orders to the gods!  The gods gave riches and kingdoms to good people, and took them away from bad people.

In the dream, Kundadhara bowed down to the gods and asked for a favor for the priest. Manibhadra asked, "What do you want, Kundadhara?"

Kundadhara could have asked for tons of gold and jewels, even the whole world! But he said, "I don't want riches for the priest. I want him to be good and kind, to find joy in doing good things!"

Manibhadra agreed. He said, “Being good always leads to happiness.  Let this priest be happy and healthy.”

The priest woke up, and saw beautiful clothes all around him. But he didn't care! He thought, "If I don't value doing good, who will? I need to be a better person!"  He went to live in the forest, being very good and very strict with himself. He ate less and less until he only ate air!  He became very powerful because he was so good.

Then, Kundadhara appeared again. The priest used his special new powers to see what happened to kings.  He saw many kings suffering in a bad place. Kundadhara said, "You prayed to me, but being good is what really matters. People chase fun and things, but heaven is closed to those who aren't good."  The priest understood. He was truly sorry for not appreciating Kundadhara's help. Kundadhara forgave him and disappeared.

Bhishma finished the story, saying, "The priest learned that being good is more important than having lots of things.  Gods and good people admire kindness, not just riches. Being good brings the greatest happiness."  So Yudhishthira learned that being a good person is the most important thing of all.
