Once upon a time, in the kingdom of Virata, a bad man named Kichaka tried to hurt Draupadi, the brave wife of the Pandava brothers.  Kichaka was very mean. He thought he could boss Draupadi around because the Pandavas were hiding in the kingdom, disguised as servants.

Kichaka told Draupadi she was his servant now and offered her lots of fancy things – gold jewelry, pretty clothes, and a soft bed.  But Draupadi was clever. She tricked him! She said she was just getting wine for the princess, who was very thirsty.

Kichaka said others could fetch the wine. But then, he grabbed Draupadi's arm! Draupadi was furious. She warned him that she was loyal to her husbands, and he would be punished.

Kichaka didn’t listen. He grabbed her clothes when she tried to run away. Draupadi fought back! She pushed him so hard he fell down like a tree that had been chopped down.

Draupadi ran to the king, Yudhishthira, for help, but Kichaka followed her. He grabbed her hair and kicked her right in front of the king!  Luckily, a magical protector of Draupadi pushed Kichaka so hard he fell down unconscious.

Yudhishthira and his brother Bhima were very angry.  Bhima wanted to attack Kichaka right then, but Yudhishthira stopped him. They were still in hiding, and they couldn't reveal themselves yet.

Draupadi was very upset. She cried and told the king how badly she had been treated.  She was so brave! She said the king and his court were also at fault for letting this happen to her.  She told everyone how powerful and strong her husbands were and how wrong Kichaka was to hurt her.

The courtiers all felt sorry for Draupadi and praised her courage. Yudhishthira, though angry, told Draupadi to go and rest. He knew her husbands would get revenge.

Draupadi went to her friend Sudeshna's room, still crying. Sudeshna asked what happened. Draupadi told her how Kichaka had hurt her.  Sudeshna said she would help get revenge. Draupadi replied that Kichaka would be punished, even if she didn't do it herself. She knew that her powerful husbands would soon take care of him.  And they did!
