(contd.)

Listen now to the circumstances under which men, by
even committing these acts, do not become stained with sin. If a Brahmana
well acquainted with the Vedas takes up arms and rushes against thee in
battle for killing thee, thou mayst proceed against him for taking his
life. By such an act the slayer does not become guilty of the slaughter
of a Brahmana.
There is a mantra in the Vedas, O son of Kunti, that
lays this down, I declare unto thee only those practices that are
sanctioned by the authority of the Vedas. One who slays a Brahmana that
has fallen away from his own duties and that advances, weapon in hand,
with intent to slaughter, does not truly become the slayer of a Brahmana.
In such a case it is the wrath of the slayer that proceeds against the
wrath of the slain. A person by drinking alcoholic stimulants in
ignorance or upon the advice of a virtuous physician when his life is at
peril, should have the regenerating ceremonies performed once more in his
case. All that I have told thee, O son of Kunti, about the eating of
interdicted food, may be cleansed by such expiatory rites. Connection
with the preceptor's wife at the preceptor's command does not stain the
pupil. The sage Uddalaka caused his son Swetaketu to be begotten by a
disciple. A person by committing theft for the sake of his preceptor in a
season of distress is not stained with sin. One, however, that takes to
thieving for procuring enjoyments for himself becomes stained. One is not
stained by stealing from other than Brahmanas (in a season of distress
and for the sake of one's preceptor). Only one that steals under such
circumstances without himself appropriating any portion thereof is
untouched by sin. A falsehood may be spoken for saving one's own life or
that of another, or for the sake of one's preceptor, or for gratifying a
woman, or for bringing about a marriage. One's vow of Brahmacharya is not
broken by having wet dreams. In such cases the expiation laid down
consists in the pouring of libations of clarified butter on the blazing
fire. If the elder brother be fallen or has renounced the world, the
younger brother does not incur sin by marrying. Solicited by a woman,
connection with her is not destructive of virtue. One should not slay or
cause to be slain an animal except in a sacrifice. Animals have become
sacred (fit for sacrifice) through the kindness manifested towards them
by the Creator himself in the ordinance laid down by him. By making a
gift in ignorance to an undeserving Brahmana one does not incur sin. The
omission (through ignorance) to behave with liberality towards a
deserving person does not lead to sin. By casting off an adulterous wife
one does not incur sin. By such treatment the woman herself may be purged
while the husband may avoid sin. One who knows the true use of the Soma
juice, does not incur sin by selling it.
By dismissing a servant who
is incompetent to render service one is not touched by sin. I have now
said unto thee those acts by doing which one does not incur sin. I shall
now speak to thee of expiation in detail.'"