Long ago, in the land of the Mahabharata, wise people talked about Vishnu, a very powerful and important being.  Usanas, a really smart guy, said, "Vishnu holds the whole world in his arms! He's amazing!"

Then, another wise man named Sanatkumara came along.  Everyone bowed to him. Usanas asked Sanatkumara to tell them more about Vishnu.

Sanatkumara said, "Vishnu is so great! He made everything – the trees, the animals, even you and me! He takes everything back at the end of time, and then makes it all again.  You can't learn about him from books or by praying a lot. The only way to truly know Vishnu is to be good and control your wishes and desires."

He explained it like this: "Imagine a goldsmith cleaning gold. He puts it in the fire again and again.  We clean our hearts by being good in many lives.  It's like cleaning a stain – you have to scrub hard! It takes time and effort, like adding many sweet-smelling flowers to sesame seeds to change their smell.  You have to be good for many lives to really understand Vishnu.”

Sanatkumara continued, "Vishnu is everywhere!  The earth is his feet, the sky is his head, the sun is his eye, and the moon is his mind.  He is everything!"

He told them that people are different colors, like dark, brown, blue, red, yellow, and white.  The white color is the best because it means you are pure and peaceful.  People go through many lives changing colors, getting better with each life.  A dark color means you've been bad, and a white color means you are very good and close to Vishnu.

Sanatkumara then explained how people reach the highest level – being close to Vishnu. It takes a long, long time and lots of good deeds.  It's like climbing a very tall ladder!

Vritra, a powerful being, listened carefully.  He understood everything Sanatkumara said.  He was so happy to know about Vishnu, that he peacefully passed away and became one with Vishnu.

Later, Yudhishthira asked Bhishma, a very wise king, if the great hero Krishna was the same Vishnu Sanatkumara talked about.

Bhishma said, "Yes! Krishna is part of the greatest power, Vishnu. He made the whole world!  Krishna is always good and always there, even when everything is destroyed, and he makes new things."

Yudhishthira worried about what would happen to him and his brothers.  Bhishma reassured them.  "You are good people! You will be happy in the world of the gods. Don’t worry!"
