Once upon a time, in a great battle, there was a fierce fight between Bhima and Duhshasana.  Duhshasana was strong! He broke Bhima's bow with one arrow. Then, he hit Bhima's chariot driver with six arrows!  Next, he shot nine arrows at Bhima himself.

Bhima was angry! He threw a powerful spear at Duhshasana. Duhshasana was quick! He cut the spear into pieces with ten arrows. Everyone cheered! Duhshasana then hit Bhima again with another arrow.

"You hit me hard!" shouted Bhima. "Now, get ready for my mace!"

Bhima grabbed his big, heavy mace. "I will drink your blood today!" he roared.

Duhshasana threw a scary spear at Bhima, but Bhima smashed it with his mace!  The mace hit Duhshasana hard on the head.  It knocked him off his chariot! His chariot broke into pieces, and all his horses died.  Duhshasana’s armor and jewels flew off. He was hurt and shaking.

Bhima remembered all the bad things Duhshasana and his brothers had done. They had been mean to Draupadi, Bhima's sister-in-law. They pulled her hair and treated her very badly while her husbands just watched.  Bhima was furious!

"I will kill Duhshasana!" Bhima yelled to everyone. He jumped off his chariot and ran at Duhshasana like a lion. He put his foot on Duhshasana's throat.  Then, he used his sword to open Duhshasana's chest and drank his blood!  

Bhima then cut off Duhshasana's head and drank more of his blood. "This blood tastes better than anything!" he said. Everyone was terrified! They ran away, scared of Bhima's strength.

One of Duhshasana's friends, Citrasena, ran away too. Yudhamanyu, another warrior, chased him and killed him. Then, Karna, another warrior on Duhshasana's side, got angry and attacked Bhima's friends.

Bhima, still angry, took some of Duhshasana’s blood and shouted, “I drank your blood, you meanie! Now, you can't hurt us anymore!” He talked about all the bad things the Kauravas had done, like stealing their kingdom and making them live in the forest.

Bhima said, "I kept my promise and killed Duhshasana. Now I will kill Duryodhana!"  He was so strong and happy, he roared like a thunder god.
