A wise man named Yajnavalkya told a king a secret about what happens after we die. He said that where our soul goes depends on where it leaves our body!

If it leaves through our feet, we go to the land of Vishnu, a powerful god.  If it leaves through our calves, we go to the Vasus, another group of gods.  Our knees lead us to the Sadhyas, our lower body to Mitra, and our thighs to Prajapati.  Leaving through our hips takes us to the Maruts, our nostrils to the moon, our arms to Indra, and our chest to Rudra. Our neck takes us to Nara, our mouth to the Viswadevas, and our ears to the gods of the sky. Our nose leads to the Wind God, our eyes to Agni (the fire god), our eyebrows to the Aswins (twin gods), and our forehead to our ancestors, the Pitris.  And if our soul leaves from the top of our head, we go to Brahman, the greatest god of all!

Yajnavalkya also told the king how to know if someone is going to die soon.  If someone can no longer see the stars Arandhati and Dhruva, or if they see the moon or a lamp flame broken in half on the south side, they might only have a year to live. If they can't see their own reflection in other people's eyes, they might only have a year left too.

If someone loses their shine or their wisdom, they might only have six months to live.  If they are mean to the gods or priests, or if their skin changes color unexpectedly, they also might only have six months.

Seeing the moon or sun with lots of holes like a spiderweb means they only have a week left.  If the smell of nice things in a temple suddenly smells awful, that also means only a week.

A stuffy nose, droopy ears, bad teeth or eyes, losing feeling, or getting very cold are all signs that someone will die that very day.  Tears from the left eye and smoke coming from the head mean the same thing.

Yajnavalkya said that when someone knows they are going to die, they should spend their time thinking about the Supreme Soul, the greatest of all.  If they want to live longer, they should give up all their pleasures and live simply.  By connecting with the Supreme Soul, we can beat death and join something that is perfect and everlasting—something that never dies, never was born, and is always happy.  Only people with a pure heart can reach that place.
