Once upon a time, during a great battle, a powerful weapon was used against Bhima, a mighty warrior.  The weapon was so strong it looked like a giant fire, and it surrounded Bhima's chariot!  It was hard to even see Bhima through the flames!

Arjuna, Bhima's brother, quickly used his own special weapon to protect Bhima.  But the fire was still very scary. It was so bright that nobody could see through it, just like trying to see a fire inside the sun!

Seeing their friend in danger, Arjuna and Krishna (who is a god in disguise) bravely rushed into the fiery weapon!  Because they had put down their own weapons, and because of Arjuna's earlier magic, they weren't hurt by the flames. They pulled Bhima away from the weapon, even though he didn't want to stop fighting!  Krishna explained that the army had stopped fighting, so Bhima should too.  The weapon calmed down once Bhima was safe.

The scary fire disappeared, and a nice breeze blew.  The animals and soldiers were happy again. Bhima looked like the sun rising in the morning!  The Pandava army got ready to fight again.

Duryodhana, the enemy leader, told Aswatthaman (the one who used the powerful weapon) to use it again. But Aswatthaman said he couldn't. That weapon could only be used once; using it again would hurt him.

Duryodhana was angry.  He told Aswatthaman to fight with other weapons. Aswatthaman remembered his father’s death and, full of anger, attacked Dhrishtadyumna, a powerful Pandava warrior. They fought fiercely, throwing many arrows at each other. Aswatthaman hit Dhrishtadyumna with many arrows, but Dhrishtadyumna fought bravely too.

Satyaki, another warrior, jumped in to help, and he and Aswatthaman fought a great battle. Many soldiers were hurt in the clash.  Aswatthaman eventually injured Satyaki with a powerful arrow.

Then Aswatthaman, still angry, shot another arrow and hit Dhrishtadyumna badly. Several more Pandavas rushed to protect Dhrishtadyumna, fighting Aswatthaman together.  The battle was intense, with many arrows flying everywhere.

Aswatthaman fought bravely against the Pandavas. He defeated many of them, even cutting off the arms and heads of some. He was a powerful warrior.

Bhima, furious about his friends being hurt, attacked Aswatthaman with all his might. Both warriors fought with everything they had, shooting tons of arrows at each other.  Finally, Aswatthaman's strength was used up, and he ran away.


Aswatthaman met a wise man named Vyasa, who explained that Krishna and Arjuna were especially protected because of their past actions and their devotion to the gods.  Aswatthaman, understanding the situation, calmed down.  He and his army left the battlefield. The Pandavas also stopped fighting for the night.

The great battle continued for many days after that, but this was one very important part of the story!
