Once upon a time, Yudhishthira, a kind king, was traveling with his friends.  A wise man named Lomasa showed him many special places.  He pointed to a river, once called Madhuvila, where even the powerful god Indra washed away his sins.  He showed a spot where a mountain sank into the earth, and another place where a special meal was cooked for Aditi to have children.  He also showed them a beautiful river, the Ganga, where a great sage became very holy.

Yudhishthira then asked about a wise man named Yavakri.  He wanted to know how Yavakri became so wise and what happened to him.

Lomasa told a story about two friends, Bharadwaja and Raivya. Bharadwaja had a son, Yavakri, and Raivya had two sons. Raivya and his sons were very popular, but Bharadwaja was not.  Yavakri was sad his father wasn't respected.  He wanted to be super smart and know everything about the Vedas (holy books).

So Yavakri did very, very hard exercises, even hurting himself with fire!  This worried Indra, the king of the gods.  Indra visited Yavakri and told him to learn from a teacher instead of hurting himself. But Yavakri was determined! He threatened to hurt himself even more if Indra didn't help him!

Indra was clever. He pretended to be an old, sick man building a dam in the river. Yavakri laughed and told the old man it was silly to try and stop the powerful river.  Indra said it was just as silly for Yavakri to hurt himself to be smart. Yavakri finally agreed to stop hurting himself.  Indra made him very, very smart, even smarter than anyone else!

Yavakri told his father the good news.  But his father warned him. He told Yavakri a story about a boy who got a special gift but became mean and lost everything because of his pride. He told Yavakri not to be friends with Raivya, because Raivya was easily angered.

Yavakri didn't listen. He got proud and started to be mean to other people. Sadly, because of his bad behavior, he eventually died.  The story reminded everyone that even with great gifts, being kind and humble is more important.
