Sanjaya told the king, "Arjuna, a super-strong warrior, shot many arrows! He hit Salya, Kripa, and Susarman hard.  He also hit many other kings:  the king of Pragjyotishas, Jayadratha, Chitrasena, Vikarna, Kritavarman, and Durmarshana. He even hit the Avanti princes!

Jayadratha shot back at Arjuna and Bhima. Salya and Kripa also shot arrows at Arjuna.  The king's sons shot many arrows at Arjuna and Bhima. But Arjuna and Bhima fought bravely. They hurt many of the Trigartas' army!

Susarman yelled and shot nine arrows at Arjuna.  Many other warriors shot arrows at Arjuna and Bhima. But they were super brave and strong! They looked like two lions playing among cows. They broke many bows, cut down many soldiers, smashed chariots, killed horses, and knocked down elephants. The battlefield was messy, with dead people, animals, and broken things everywhere.

Arjuna was amazing! He fought many heroes at once.  Kripa, Kritavarman, Jayadratha, and the Avanti princes kept fighting.  Arjuna and Bhima fought hard, pushing back the Kaurava army.

The Kauravas shot tons of arrows at Arjuna, but he shot many arrows back! He sent many warriors to the land of the dead. Salya got angry and shot Arjuna in the chest. But Arjuna broke Salya's bow and shot Salya back. Salya then tried again.

Drona and Jayatsena (the king of Magadha) came to help. Jayatsena shot many arrows at Bhima, but Bhima shot even more! He even knocked Jayatsena's driver off his chariot, and Jayatsena ran away! Then Drona shot at Bhima, but Bhima shot back at Drona.

Arjuna shot lots of arrows at Susarman.  Bhishma, Duryodhana, and Vrihadvala got angry and attacked Arjuna and Bhima.

Then, the Pandavas fought back! Sikhandin, a brave warrior, led the charge against Bhishma. All the Pandavas and their friends fought Bhishma.  The Kauravas also fought hard to protect Bhishma. It was a huge, terrible battle! Bhishma was the most important person in the battle; whoever won the battle would have Bhishma on their side.  Dhrishtadyumna told the Pandava army to attack Bhishma, and they charged like a giant wave crashing on the shore!"
