Once upon a time, in the land of the Kurus, lived a great warrior named Drona.  He was a teacher of archery, the best in the land! King Bhishma, a powerful warrior himself, asked Drona to teach his grandsons, the Kaurava princes.  Bhishma gave Drona a wonderful house and many gifts.  He also asked Drona to teach the Pandava princes, too.

Drona happily agreed. He gathered all the princes together. "I have a secret wish," he said. "Promise me you'll help me achieve it when you're skilled warriors."  Arjuna, one of the Pandava princes, bravely promised he would. Drona hugged Arjuna tightly and was very happy.

Drona taught the princes to use all kinds of weapons. Many other princes from faraway lands came to learn from him, including Karna, a strong prince who was sometimes jealous of Arjuna. But Arjuna was the best student. He practiced day and night, always wanting to learn more.

Drona gave each student a pot to fetch water.  He gave his own son, Ashwatthama, a big pot so he could finish quickly and learn extra.  Clever Arjuna used magic to fill his small pot quickly, so he could spend extra time with Drona.  Drona noticed Arjuna's dedication. He told the cook, "Never let Arjuna eat in the dark." But one night, the lamp went out while Arjuna was eating.  Arjuna kept eating!  Drona saw him practicing with his bow in the dark. He was so proud! Drona promised Arjuna, "You will be the greatest archer in the world!"

Drona taught Arjuna to fight on horseback, on elephants, and everywhere. One day, the princes went hunting.  Their dog found a hidden archer, Ekalavya, a prince from a different land. Ekalavya was so good! He shot seven arrows into the dog's mouth before it could close it.  The princes were amazed. They found Ekalavya, who was Drona's secret student. He'd made a clay statue of Drona and practiced with it!

Arjuna told Drona, "You said I'd be the best, but Ekalavya is better!" Drona found Ekalavya.  Ekalavya bowed down and said, "I'm your student." Drona asked for a fee: Ekalavya's right thumb! Ekalavya sadly cut off his thumb and gave it to Drona. He could never shoot as well again. Arjuna felt relieved.

Drona’s other students were also skilled. Bhima and Duryodhana were great with maces.  Ashwatthama was amazing with all weapons.  But Arjuna was the best of all. He could fight thousands of enemies at once!

Finally, Drona tested his students. He put a bird on a tree and asked them to shoot its head off.  He asked each student what they saw. Yudhishthira, Duryodhana, and the others all said, “I see the tree, you, my brothers and the bird.”  Drona said they were distracted by other things and didn’t focus! But Arjuna, always focused, passed the test. He was truly the greatest archer of them all!
