King Dhritarashtra was very worried.  He said, "My son, Bhima is incredibly strong!  He's like a fierce tiger, and I'm a scared deer! I can't sleep at night.  I worry about him all the time. He’s stronger than anyone in my army.  Bhima is really angry. He never smiles. He looks scary, and his voice is like thunder!  He'll defeat all my sons in battle.

He's like a giant bull, swinging his big, heavy, golden mace. It's so sharp and strong.  Bhima is cruel. Even when they were little, he always beat my sons in games. He’s always been mean to them.  I’m terrified! He’s like a lion among sheep.  He’ll crush my whole army – soldiers, elephants, and horses!

No one can stop Bhima. He's as fast as the wind and strong as a god! Even when he was little, he was too strong to control. My sons angered him and now he’s going to get revenge! He is so angry that he won't listen to anyone.  He's tall and strong, much stronger than his brother Arjuna! He’s very fast and strong.  He can even kill evil spirits!

My sons are foolish.  They’re like tiny boats trying to cross a huge, stormy ocean without any paddles. Bhima is that ocean; they will drown! They don’t listen to me. They only see the sweetness of victory, not the danger.  Bhima’s mace is huge and heavy. It can kill lots of people with one swing! When he fights, he's like a burning fire, destroying everything.  He’ll smash my army!  He’s already hurt my army badly in the past.   Bhima is unstoppable, he’s even beaten very powerful kings!

Even the bravest warriors in my army—Bhishma, Drona, and Kripa—know how strong Bhima is.  They will fight bravely, but it might not be enough. It’s fate.  My sons want to fight and become famous, but they will all probably die.  They are all related and trained by the same teachers, so it will be a very sad battle. It is said that it's good for a warrior to die in battle, but I'm still very sad.  All of this started because of a game of dice that my son, Duryodhana, cheated in.  It was a very bad thing to do.  What can I do? I'm trapped by time, I can't stop it.  My sons will all die, and then I will have to listen to the sad cries of all the women in my kingdom. I will feel the pain of losing them deeply. I don't know what to do anymore!"
