Once upon a time, a wise prince named Yudhishthira asked his grandpa, Bhishma, a very important question.  Yudhishthira wanted to know what a Brahmin (a holy man) should do if they ate something they weren't supposed to.

Bhishma, who was super wise, explained, "My dear prince, I will tell you how Brahmins can be forgiven for eating certain foods."

He said, "If a Brahmin eats ghee (clarified butter) or sesame seeds, they should pray to the gods by saying a special prayer called the Savitri hymn and offer some ghee to the fire."

"If they eat meat, honey, or salt," Bhishma continued, "they just need to stand up until the sun rises."

"If a Brahmin gets gold, they should quietly say the Gayatri prayer (another special prayer) while holding a piece of iron."  This was also the way to be forgiven for getting money, clothes, or even jewelry.

If a Brahmin ate nice things like sweet rice pudding, sugarcane juice, or oil, they just needed to bathe three times that day: once in the morning, once at noon, and once in the evening.  For things like rice, flowers, or milk, they had to say the Gayatri prayer 100 times.

Bhishma also told Yudhishthira about what to do if a Brahmin ate at a funeral. If they ate on the third day after someone died, they had to bathe three times a day for twelve whole days!

If they ate at a funeral before then, they had to do even more! They needed to say the Savitri prayer and do some other special prayers to ask for forgiveness.  If they ate there for three nights, they had to bathe three times a day for seven days.

Bhishma even talked about what happened if a Brahmin ate with people from different groups.  If they ate with a Sudra (a worker), the Brahmin had to do special cleaning ceremonies.  If they ate with a Kshatriya (a warrior) they had to bathe with their clothes on. Eating together from the same plate was even worse; it caused bad luck!  

To get rid of all the bad luck, everyone needed to do special prayers and ceremonies to ask the gods to forgive them and make things right again.  Bhishma told Yudhishthira how to make everything better again. That way, everyone could be happy and healthy.
