King Dhritarashtra asked his advisor, Sanjaya, "Sanjaya, after Bhishma made that scary promise in battle, what happened? Tell me everything!"

Sanjaya said, "King, after midday, when the sun was starting to set, the Pandavas had won the fight.  Your father, Bhishma, who knew all the rules of war,  rushed towards the Pandavas' army with his own soldiers and your sons. A terrible battle started! It was so loud, with the sounds of bows and arrows, that it was like mountains crashing!  Soldiers shouted things like, 'Stop!', 'Here I am!', 'Attack!'  The ground was covered with fallen golden armor, crowns, and flags.  It was like a pile of rocks.  Hundreds and thousands of soldiers fell, some even still standing after their heads were cut off!  A river of blood flowed, mixed with mud and the bodies of dead elephants. It was a horrible sight, like nothing ever seen before!  The battlefield was so full of bodies, chariots couldn’t even move. It looked like a field of blue hills.  It was also beautiful, like a starry night, because of all the colorful clothing and head wraps.  Some wounded soldiers still bravely fought. Others cried out for their fathers, brothers, and friends.  Others shouted encouragement to each other.

Bhishma, with his bow, shot arrows like poisonous snakes. He was so fast, he seemed to be everywhere at once!  The Pandavas couldn't even look at him—all they saw were his arrows!  Many brave warriors cried as they saw their friends falling.  Kings and soldiers charged at Bhishma, but they were like tiny insects flying into a fire.  Bhishma's arrows never missed.  He killed elephants with one shot, and sometimes even pierced several soldiers at once.  Anyone who got close to Bhishma fell instantly.  The Pandavas' army was scared and started to run away, even though their best warriors tried to stop them.  The army scattered everywhere.   Chariots, elephants, and horses lay everywhere, and the army of the Pandavas cried out in fear.  Friends fought against friends, family against family. Some Pandavas ran away, throwing off their armor. Their army was as confused as a herd of cows.

Krishna, seeing this, told Arjuna, 'This is your chance!  You promised to kill Bhishma!  Your army is running away!   Arjuna, defeat Bhishma, or you’ll be defeated by fear!'  Arjuna said, 'I will defeat Bhishma!'  Krishna drove his chariot towards Bhishma. When they got close, the Pandava army became brave again.  Bhishma shot a rain of arrows at Arjuna's chariot, making it disappear!  But Krishna bravely drove on.  Arjuna broke Bhishma's bow with his arrows. Bhishma got a new bow, but Arjuna broke that one too! Bhishma praised Arjuna's skill. They fought fiercely, and Bhishma wounded Arjuna and Krishna with many arrows. They looked like bulls who had been attacked by other bulls.  Bhishma kept shooting arrows, and Krishna wondered how Arjuna was so calm during the battle. Krishna saw that Bhishma was winning and thought the Pandava army would be destroyed. Krishna thought even the strongest beings couldn’t stand against Bhishma.  He saw the Pandava army running away again and the Kauravas getting excited. Krishna decided to help. He said he would fight Bhishma for the Pandavas.  Even though Arjuna was hit by many arrows, he wouldn't attack Bhishma out of respect.

Just then, Bhishma again rained arrows down on Arjuna. It was so dark from all the arrows that nobody could see the sun, sky, or ground. The wind carried smoke, and everything felt terrible.  Many other warriors joined Bhishma, surrounding Arjuna and Krishna.  Then, Ghatotkacha, a powerful warrior, came to help. He shouted at the Pandavas, telling them to fight!   Krishna, seeing the retreating Pandavas, told Ghatotkacha that everyone should run away and let him and Arjuna fight Bhishma.  He vowed to defeat Bhishma and Drona.

Krishna jumped from his chariot and threw his magical discus, which looked like a bright sun. The ground shook! He looked like a powerful, angry lion.   Bhishma, seeing Krishna approach, said, ‘Come, God, fight me!  I accept my death at your hand. This will bring me honor.’ Krishna responded saying Bhishma was the cause of all the war. He said that people need to follow the rules. Bhishma said that Fate, or destiny, was in control of everything.  Arjuna ran to stop Krishna. Krishna, very angry, pulled Arjuna along like a tree in a storm! Arjuna stopped him ten steps away from Bhishma.  He vowed to help and Krishna listened to his promise. Krishna got back on his chariot, and blew his conch, which was very loud. The Kuru army shouted back.  Arjuna then used his powerful bow, and shot many arrows, destroying enemy chariots, bows and weapons.  King Virata and other brave warriors heard Arjuna’s bow and rushed to help.  No one dared to go where Arjuna was fighting.  Arjuna’s arrows killed many soldiers, elephants, and horses, and caused a large river of blood to flow on the battlefield.

Seeing all the Kuru warriors being defeated, the Pandavas and their allies cheered.  Arjuna and Krishna also roared with victory.  Bhishma, Drona, Duryodhana, and others were badly injured. Seeing the sun setting, the Kuru army retreated.  Arjuna, having done his duty, returned to his camp. That night, everyone talked about the great victory of Arjuna. They said he had killed thousands of soldiers and elephants."
