Once upon a time, a good king named Yudhishthira asked his wise grandfather, Bhishma, some important questions.  He wanted to know how to live a good life, what the best gifts were, and who deserved respect.

Bhishma, who was very wise, explained things just like his teacher, Vyasa, had taught him.  Even the gods didn't know everything about this!  Bhishma said it's very important to be good and kind. He explained that some people were less good than others. He said that a bad person was like ten bad people, and a really bad person even worse than that!  Because of this, you shouldn't accept gifts from bad people.

The most important thing, Bhishma said, is to learn about being good and religious. This includes things like prayers, helping others and being respectful.  Bhishma then talked about a special ceremony called a Sraddha, which is done to honor ancestors.

A messenger from the gods asked some questions about the Sraddha. The ancestors explained that there were three rice balls used in the ceremony. One goes into water to please the moon god, one is eaten by the wife to bring good children, and one goes into fire to make wishes come true. The messenger and the ancestors talked about how important it was to be pure and good on that day.

Then, another wise person, a Rishi named Vidyutprabha, talked about how to get rid of bad things we have done. He said thinking about holy places and dipping your head in water could help.  He also said that touching a cow's back was good.

Vidyutprabha shared another secret he learned from a great teacher: standing on one foot on a mountain, arms raised, looking at a fire, cleanses your heart.  This is very hard, but it's very good!

Then, the god Indra asked another wise person, Vrihaspati, about bad things people do. Vrihaspati explained that things like peeing towards the sun, not respecting the wind, not giving offerings to the fire, and taking milk from a cow whose baby is too young, are all bad.

The ancestors also talked about good things you can do.  Setting free a blue cow, giving sesame seeds and water on special days, and lighting lamps in the rainy season can help keep your family safe and happy.  By doing these things, we show respect to those who have passed on.  Bhishma finished by saying that being good and doing good things is the most important thing.
