Arjuna was scared and confused. He was fighting a big battle, and he needed help.  He talked to Krishna, a powerful friend.

Arjuna said, "Krishna, your wise words have helped me understand so much! You told me about how the world begins and ends, and how amazing you are. But I want to *see* your true power. If you think I can handle it, please show me your real form!"

Krishna said, "Look, Arjuna! You see many gods and goddesses – the Sun gods, the wind gods, and many more! You see everything in the world, all living and non-living things – all packed into my body! But you can't see me with your normal eyes. I'll give you special sight!"

Then, BOOM! Krishna showed Arjuna his amazing, powerful form. It was HUGE, with tons of arms, eyes, and mouths.  It was brighter than a thousand suns! Arjuna saw the whole universe inside Krishna's body. Arjuna's hair stood on end! He was scared and amazed.

Arjuna said, "Krishna, I see everything! Gods, creatures, everything! You are everywhere, with no beginning or end.  You’re so bright and powerful, it’s scary!  I see all these soldiers, even my friends, being pulled into your mouths!"  Arjuna was very worried. He saw many people going into Krishna's fierce, fiery mouths like moths to a flame.

Krishna said, "I am death, the one who ends everything. I'm killing all these soldiers.  You have to fight and win this battle. Be brave, Arjuna.  You are the one who will help me do this."

Arjuna was still afraid, but he listened. He bowed down to Krishna.

Arjuna said, "Krishna, everyone praises you! Even the demons are scared! You are the greatest of all.  I'm so sorry if I have ever been disrespectful. You are my father, my friend, everything!  But please, show me your normal form again. I'm scared of this powerful form!"

Krishna smiled.  "Arjuna, only you have seen this form! Even the gods don’t usually see it. Don't be scared.  I'll show you my normal form."

POOF! Krishna changed back to his normal self. Arjuna felt better.

Arjuna said, "Now I feel much calmer, seeing your normal form."

Krishna said, "My powerful form is hard to see. You can only see it through love and respect for me. If you always remember me and put me first, if you're kind and not angry, then you will always be close to me."
