Once upon a time, in a great battle, Bhima, a strong Pandava warrior, was fighting Karna.  Bhima's bowstring *twang!* went, and he clapped his hands.  Karna, a powerful warrior on the other side, got really angry, like a mad elephant hearing another elephant roar!

He stopped fighting Bhima for a second. He looked at all the warriors Bhima had already defeated. Karna felt very sad. He sighed deeply and went back to fight Bhima.

Karna, with eyes as red as copper, shot many arrows at Bhima. The arrows flew like the sun's rays! Bhima was covered in arrows, just like a tree full of birds!  Karna shot so many arrows, it seemed like they came from his chariot, his umbrella, everywhere!

Bhima, brave and fearless, wasn't scared. He fought back!  He shot nine arrows at Karna.  Then Karna shot many more arrows, but Bhima shot twenty arrows right back at him!

Everyone watching cheered for Bhima.  They shouted, "Well done!"  But Duryodhana, Karna's friend, was worried. He shouted to his brothers, "Help Karna! Bhima is going to kill him!"

Duryodhana's seven brothers attacked Bhima all at once. They rained arrows down on him, like a storm!  But Bhima was strong.  He shot seven powerful arrows, like shining suns, and defeated them all.  Seven of Duryodhana's brothers fell to the ground.

One of Duryodhana's brothers, Vikarna, died. Bhima was sad, but he remembered his promise to defeat all of Duryodhana's army.  He roared loudly.

Yudhishthira, Bhima's brother, heard the roar and knew they were winning. He was very happy.  Then he went to fight another warrior.

Duryodhana saw his many dead brothers and remembered some wise words.  He realised all this trouble started because of his bad choices, his mean words, and his unfair actions.  He couldn't change what happened.  Many of his warriors had fallen in battle.  Duryodhana's army had been badly hurt.  Sanjaya, who was telling the story, said, "This battle is all because of Duryodhana's mistakes.”  He was very sad but knew there was nothing left to do but to fight on.
