Once upon a time, King Janamejaya asked a wise man named Vaisampayana a very big question.  He wanted to know how gods, demons, and all the animals and people came to be.

Vaisampayana said, "Okay, I'll tell you a story!  Many powerful beings from the heavens came to live as people on Earth."

He explained that some powerful demons, who were once gods in the heavens, were reborn as kings. Viprachitti became Jarasandha, a strong bull of a man! Hiranyakasipu became Sisupala, a mighty king.  Samhlada became Salya, another powerful king.  Many other demons, like Ayahsira, Aswasira, Aysanku, Gaganamurdhan, and Vegavat, became kings in the Kekaya kingdom.  Lots and lots of other demons became kings too, each with their own strong names and stories.  There were kings like Amitaujas, Ugrasena, Asoka, Hardikya, and many more.

Vaisampayana went on to tell him about other important people. Drona, a great teacher of archery, wasn't born from a mother. He came from a part of a powerful god.  His son, Aswatthaman, was even more powerful!  Bhishma, a brave warrior, was the son of a river goddess.  Kripa, another brave warrior, came from a different group of gods.  Sakuni, a clever and tricky king, was actually a part of a time period called Dwapara Yuga.  Satyaki, a brave warrior, came from a different part of the heavens.  Drupada and Kritavarman and Virata were also powerful beings from the heavens who became kings.

He told King Janamejaya how Dhritarashtra, a blind king, was born, and how his brother Pandu was born.  He also told him that Vidura, a wise man, came from a very wise god.  Duryodhana, a bad king, was born from a part of evil.  His hundred brothers were reborn as demons from a different group of gods.

Then Vaisampayana told King Janamejaya about the Pandavas, the five brothers who were heroes. Yudhishthira was a part of Dharma (goodness), Bhima was a part of the wind, Arjuna was a part of Indra (the king of the gods), and Nakula and Sahadeva were parts of twin gods.  He also explained that Abhimanyu, a brave warrior, was the son of Arjuna, and came from a part of the moon god.

Vaisampayana also told how Karna, a great warrior, was the son of Surya (the sun god), and how he was secretly born and given away.

He explained that Draupadi, a strong princess, came from a part of a goddess.  He told how many gods and goddesses came to earth as people.

Finally, Vaisampayana said that knowing these stories helps people understand how everything is connected, and it makes people wiser and braver, even when things are sad.  He listed all the names of Dhritarashtra’s sons, a very long list!

And that, King Janamejaya, is the story of how many powerful beings from the heavens came to live among humans!
