Once upon a time, a good king named Yudhishthira asked a wise old man, Bhishma, a very important question: "How can a king keep his people safe without hurting anyone?"

Bhishma told him a story about two other kings: Dyumatsena and his son, Satyavat.  Dyumatsena wanted to punish some bad people. But Satyavat, his son, said, "Sometimes what seems bad is actually good, and what seems good is bad. Killing people is never truly right."

Dyumatsena disagreed. He said, "If we let bad people go free, then everything will be chaos!  People won't respect the law."

Satyavat had a different idea. He said, "Let wise people, called Brahmins, guide everyone. If people are good, those who aren't will want to be good too. If someone doesn't listen to the Brahmins, then the king should punish them, but not by killing them.  The king should follow the rules of fairness.  Killing one bad person hurts many others – their family and friends lose their support."

Satyavat explained that sometimes bad people can change, and good children can come from bad parents.  So, instead of killing bad people, the king should try other ways to punish them: take away their money, put them in jail, or even make them look silly. If they are truly sorry and promise to be good, they should be forgiven. Even Brahmins, who are usually very good, should be punished if they do wrong.

Dyumatsena argued that if we don't punish truly bad people, the rules of society will be destroyed.  He said that long ago, people were much better, and a simple warning was enough punishment.  Later, scolding was enough, then fines. Now, in these difficult times, it seems only killing really stops bad people. But, he added, even killing one robber doesn’t really stop others.  Robbers are cut off from everything good – they have no connections to anyone or anything.

Satyavat said there's another way. If the king can't make bad people good, he can perform a special ceremony to remove the badness, kind of like a magic spell.  Kings work very hard to keep everyone safe and happy.  They don’t enjoy killing people; they do it only to make things better for everyone.  Good kings lead by example.  If the king is good, his people will try to be good, too.  A king must control himself before he can control others.  He should punish anyone who does wrong, even friends and family.  A kingdom where bad people go unpunished is a kingdom where bad things happen more and more.

Then Satyavat talked about how different times have different levels of goodness.  Long ago, everyone was good, and kings were gentle.  Now, there isn’t much goodness left.  Kings must still try to be good, but it is not easy in our times! But even in tough times,  kings must always try to be as kind as they can be.  Even killing is only done as a last resort and with great regret.
