Long ago, in the land of Bharatavarsha, there lived five brothers, the Pandavas.  One day, the eldest brother, Yudhishthira, asked his wise grandfather, Bhishma, to tell them about Mahadeva, the greatest god of all.

Bhishma said, "Mahadeva is everywhere and nowhere at once! He’s the creator of everything, and even the other gods worship him. He's so powerful, even I can't fully explain him. Only Narayana, another great god, truly understands Mahadeva."  Bhishma explained that Krishna, a very good and powerful king, had worshipped Mahadeva for a thousand years to get a blessing.  Bhishma said that only Krishna could fully tell about Mahadeva’s amazing powers.

Then, Bhishma asked Krishna to tell the story of Mahadeva’s thousand names, a very special story.

Krishna said, “Even the other gods can't fully understand Mahadeva! But I will tell you some of his amazing qualities.”

Krishna told a story about his own wife, Jamvavati, who wanted a son.  Krishna decided to worship Mahadeva to make her happy. He went to a beautiful place in the mountains called Himavat.  This place was filled with amazing trees and animals, and many holy people lived there doing hard prayers.  There, Krishna met a wise man named Upamanyu.

Upamanyu said, “Mahadeva lives here!  He's shown his great power to many people who have worshipped him. Even very strong demons got special powers from Mahadeva.” Upamanyu told Krishna many stories of how people gained amazing things by worshipping Mahadeva.  He talked about how demons and even gods gained great powers by worshipping him!

Upamanyu also explained that Mahadeva could change his form into anything – a man, a woman, an animal, even a tree!  He could be happy, angry, or anything else.  He showed Krishna many, many different forms of Mahadeva, all incredibly powerful.

Upamanyu told Krishna that Mahadeva was the very soul of everything. He was everywhere and in everyone.  He was the cause of everything. Then Upamanyu told Krishna about the time he himself had worshipped Mahadeva.

Upamanyu explained that when he was young, he asked his mother for milk.  She couldn’t give him any and he was sad. His mother told him that only by worshipping Mahadeva could one get things like milk. Upamanyu said he wanted to see Mahadeva. He prayed very hard for many years, doing very difficult things.


Finally, Mahadeva appeared to Upamanyu!  He was incredibly bright and surrounded by other gods.  Mahadeva had many arms, and held amazing weapons, like a powerful bow and arrow called the Pasupata.  Upamanyu praised Mahadeva, telling him how great and powerful he was.  Mahadeva was so happy with Upamanyu’s devotion that he granted him many blessings.  

Then, Upamanyu told Krishna that he, too, would soon see Mahadeva! He gave Krishna special prayers to say, and promised he’d see the great god.  Krishna followed Upamanyu's instructions. He prayed very hard.  Then, after many months of prayers, Krishna saw Mahadeva in all his glory.  Mahadeva was happy and gave Krishna many blessings.


And so, Krishna, having seen Mahadeva’s amazing power and kindness, told the story, showing how powerful and kind Mahadeva truly was.
