Once upon a time, during a huge battle in the Mahabharata,  a lot of soldiers, horses, and elephants were fighting.  Shakuni, a very bad guy, attacked Sahadeva, a good warrior. Sahadeva shot many arrows at Shakuni, like a swarm of bees!

At the same time, another bad guy, Uluka, attacked Bhima, another good warrior, hitting him with arrows. Shakuni also hit Bhima with some arrows, then showered Sahadeva with even more!  Both sides shot tons of arrows, making the sky look dark and rainy.  The ground was covered with dead soldiers and horses, broken weapons, and blood. It looked like a terrible mess.

Bhima and Sahadeva fought so hard that they killed many soldiers. The battlefield became scary – full of dead bodies and scary animals eating them. After many Kauravas (the bad guys) died, the Pandavas (the good guys) were winning.

Then, Shakuni hit Sahadeva hard with a spear.  Sahadeva was hurt, but Bhima got angry and fought off the Kaurava army. He roared so loudly that Shakuni's soldiers ran away. Duryodhana, the leader of the bad guys, told his soldiers to keep fighting, but they were scared.

They started fighting again. Sahadeva hit Shakuni with more arrows.  Shakuni fought back, and Uluka tried to help his dad.  They shot lots of arrows at each other.  Bhima hit them too.  Sahadeva got really mad and cut off Uluka’s head!

When Shakuni saw his son die, he got sad. He remembered some wise advice, then he threw spears, a sword, and a club at Sahadeva, but Sahadeva cut them all up with his arrows!

Shakuni was scared.  All his soldiers ran away. Sahadeva chased after him.  He shouted, "Fight like a warrior! You cheated at the game, and now you will pay the price!"  Sahadeva was angry about the unfair game they played earlier.

Sahadeva shot more arrows at Shakuni, cutting off his umbrella, his flag, and his bow. Finally, Sahadeva shot one last arrow and cut off Shakuni's head!  All of Shakuni's soldiers ran away, scared.

The Pandavas were happy. They cheered and blew their horns, celebrating their victory. They were glad that Shakuni, a very mean and tricky man, was finally defeated. The battle was almost over, and the good guys were winning!
