King Dhritarashtra was worried. He asked his advisor, Sanjaya, "What's Yudhishthira, the good Pandava king, doing?  He knows we've got a huge army ready for war.  My sons are trying to trick him into making peace, but what's he doing?"

Sanjaya said, "King Yudhishthira is calm. All the Pandavas and their friends, like the brave warriors from Panchala, are listening to him.  Lots of chariots are arriving, ready for battle.  It's like the sun rising, everyone is happy to be with Yudhishthira!"  Even the shepherds and their animals were celebrating!  Even girls were excited to see the great warrior Arjuna!

Dhritarashtra then asked, "Tell me about Dhrishtadyumna's army and all the others fighting for the Pandavas!"

Suddenly, Sanjaya fainted!  Vidura said, "Sanjaya has fainted from seeing how strong the Pandava army is!"

Dhritarashtra said, "Of course! Seeing those brave Pandava warriors must be scary!"

When Sanjaya woke up, he told Dhritarashtra, "Your Majesty, the Pandavas are thin from their hard life, but they're ready.  They'll fight with the brave Dhrishtadyumna. He’s always honest and fair.  And then there's mighty Bhima!  He's unbelievably strong! He saved his brothers from a fire and from many other dangers! And Arjuna is even stronger; he beat many kings!  Nakula and Sahadeva are also amazing warriors.  They're fantastic fighters, too.

Sikhandi is a very powerful fighter who was once a woman.  The five Kekaya princes are also on their side, and Yuyudhana, the strong warrior, and King Virata! The King of Kasi is with them too!  Draupadi’s sons, although young, are fierce fighters!  And Abhimanyu is brave like Krishna and wise like Yudhishthira. Dhrishtaketu is another powerful fighter and is bringing a huge army.  Even Krishna himself is fighting for them!  Sarabha and Karakarsa are with them too, as are Sahadeva (son of Jarasandha) and Jayatsena.  And the mighty Drupada will fight with them too. Yudhishthira has many kings from the east and north fighting with him. He's ready for war!"
