Sanjaya said, "Arjuna was very sad. His son, Iravat, had died.  He sighed like a snake.  He talked to Krishna in the middle of the battle.  'Vidura, a very wise man, knew this war would be terrible. He tried to stop it,' Arjuna said. 'So many good people are dying!  This war is all about silly things like money.  It's terrible that we are killing our own family!  What good is all this money if we lose our family? This is all Duryodhana's and Sakuni's fault, and Karna gave them bad ideas.  Even if the king had only asked for half the kingdom, or just five villages, it would have been better. Duryodhana wouldn't even give that! This war makes me ashamed to be a warrior.  But I have to fight.  Let's attack!'

Krishna told his horses to go faster.  The noise of the battle was as loud as a stormy ocean!  In the afternoon, the fighting was like loud thunder.  Drona's soldiers fought Bhima. Then Bhishma, Kripa, Bhagadatta, and Susarman attacked Arjuna. Kritavarman and Valhika fought Satyaki. King Amvashta fought Abhimanyu.  Many other warriors fought each other.  Bhima was very angry. He was like a fire burning brightly! Duryodhana's soldiers shot many arrows at Bhima. He looked fierce and strong.

Bhima was powerful! He killed many of Duryodhana’s soldiers, like a lion killing smaller animals.  He killed Vyudoroska, Kundalin, Anadhriti, Kundabhedin, Virata, Dirghalochana, Dirghavahu, Suvahu, and Kanykadhyaja. When they fell from their chariots, they looked beautiful, like mango trees with flowers falling in the spring. The other soldiers were scared of Bhima and ran away. Drona shot many arrows at Bhima, but he was brave. He kept fighting like a strong bull in a rainstorm.  He was like a tiger among deer, chasing and frightening Duryodhana’s soldiers.

Arjuna fought Bhishma, Bhagadatta, and Gautama. He was a great warrior and he killed many soldiers. Abhimanyu was brave too! He made King Amvashta fall off his chariot.

Many warriors fought each other. They pulled hair, bit, and punched.  Fathers and sons fought each other.  The battlefield was a mess!  Broken bows, arrows, swords, and shields were everywhere.  Dead soldiers lay on the ground, some still holding their weapons. The ground was covered in blood and broken things. It looked terrible and beautiful all at once.  It was like a big, sad party with lots of broken toys.

After a long, tiring day of fighting, it got dark. Both armies stopped fighting and went to sleep."
