Arjuna, the great warrior, fought some tricky monsters called Nivata-Kavachas.  They were sneaky! They hid themselves, using magic to trick Arjuna.  Arjuna fought back with his amazing bow, Gandiva.  He shot arrows, and *whoosh!* he cut off their heads!

The monsters, surprised, stopped their magic and ran back to their city.  When the magic disappeared, Arjuna saw a huge mess!  Thousands of dead monsters lay everywhere.  Broken weapons and body parts were scattered all over the battlefield.  Even the horses couldn't move easily!

Then, the Nivata-Kavachas tried a new trick. They hid again, and threw huge rocks from the sky!  Rocks rained down on Arjuna and his chariot.  It looked like a mountain cave!  Arjuna's charioteer, Matali, saw Arjuna was scared.

"Don't be afraid, Arjuna!" Matali shouted. "Use the thunderbolt!"

Arjuna used the powerful thunderbolt weapon.  *BOOM!*  He aimed it at the rocks and shot special arrows.  The arrows, powered by the thunderbolt, smashed through the monsters' magic and hit them hard.  They fell to the ground like mountains crumbling!  The arrows even chased the monsters who'd run underground.

Amazingly, Arjuna, his horses, his chariot, and Matali were unharmed!  Matali smiled. "Arjuna, you're even stronger than the gods!"

The monster wives cried sadly in their city.  Arjuna and Matali drove their chariot into the city.  The sound of the chariot scared the women, and they ran and dropped their jewelry. It sounded like rocks falling on a mountain.  They all hid in their jeweled homes.

Arjuna saw their amazing city—even better than the gods' city!  He asked Matali why the gods didn't live there. Matali explained that long ago, the monsters had driven the gods away after they wished to live there, and be safe from the gods.  The gods couldn't defeat the monsters themselves!  Only Arjuna, with his powerful weapons, could do it. The great god Indra had given Arjuna those weapons so he could defeat the Nivata-Kavachas.

After Arjuna had won the battle and taken the city, he and Matali went back to the gods' home.  Arjuna was a true hero!
