Once upon a time, the Pandava brothers – Yudhishthira, Bhima, Arjuna, and the twins Nakula and Sahadeva – got into a big fight!  Thousands of magical Gandharvas, who are like super-strong fairies from the sky, attacked them.  The Pandavas were outnumbered – only five of them against thousands of Gandharvas!

The Gandharvas were very strong and tried to break the Pandavas' chariots, just like they'd broken Karna and Duryodhana's chariots before.  But the Pandavas were brave warriors!  They shot thousands of arrows, raining down a storm of arrows on the Gandharvas.  The Gandharvas couldn’t get close!

Arjuna, the best archer, got really angry. He used his super-powerful magical weapons!  With one weapon, he sent thousands and thousands of Gandharvas far, far away!  Bhima, the strongest, killed many Gandharvas too.  Even Nakula and Sahadeva fought bravely, killing hundreds of Gandharvas.

The Gandharvas, losing the battle, grabbed the Kauravas (Duryodhana and his brothers) and flew away into the sky. But Arjuna was quick! He shot so many arrows that he made a huge net of arrows, trapping them like birds in a cage!

The trapped Gandharvas threw swords and spears at Arjuna, but he easily blocked them.  Then he shot his arrows, and the Gandharvas started falling like rain – heads, arms, and legs falling from the sky!  The Gandharvas were scared!

They threw even more arrows down at Arjuna from the sky, but Arjuna was so strong, he stopped them all! He used his special super-arrows: Sthunakarna, Indrajala, Saura, Agneya, and Saumya.  These magical arrows burned the Gandharvas just like thunderbolts burn!

The leader of the Gandharvas, Chitrasena, flew down and attacked Arjuna with a big iron mace. But Arjuna cleverly cut the mace into seven pieces with his arrows!  Chitrasena hid himself using magic, but Arjuna found him and used even more magical weapons.

Finally, Chitrasena showed himself.  He told Arjuna, "It's me, your friend!"  Arjuna, seeing his friend was tired, stopped fighting.  All the Pandavas stopped, and they all talked about the big fight and became friends again.
