Once upon a time, during a great battle, the mighty warriors Arjuna and Karna faced each other.  Their chariots, pulled by white horses, crashed together like two huge elephants fighting over a female elephant.  

Arjuna and Karna were amazing fighters.  They shot arrows like rain, their bows twanging loudly.  Their chariots rattled, and everyone could hear the sounds of their bowstrings and hands. It was a very noisy, exciting battle!

The battle was so fierce, it looked like a storm! Arrows flew everywhere.  Both Arjuna and Karna were very brave and strong, each trying to defeat the other.  Both armies watched in fear and excitement. Some cheered for their favorite warrior.

The Somakas shouted to Arjuna, "Hurry! Kill Karna!"  Others shouted to Karna, "Kill Arjuna!"

Arjuna and Karna fired many arrows at each other. They both hit each other many times. Then Arjuna shot a fiery weapon that lit the sky! It was so bright, it made everyone's clothes catch fire!  Karna quickly used his own powerful weapon to put out the flames.  

Suddenly, dark clouds covered the sky, and it started to rain. Then Arjuna used another special weapon to clear away the clouds.  He shot so many arrows, they filled the sky.  They hit Karna's chariot, and his horses, his weapons and even the chariot's flag.  Karna, though hurt, fought back bravely with his own powerful weapon. He defeated many of Arjuna’s soldiers.

Bhima, Arjuna's brother, got angry. "Arjuna," he said, "Why can't you defeat Karna? He's killing so many of our soldiers!"  Krishna, Arjuna's friend, told Arjuna to use his strongest weapons.

Arjuna used his strongest weapon, a super powerful arrow!  But even this powerful arrow was met by Karna! Arjuna then used another even stronger weapon.  This time, hundreds upon hundreds of golden arrows covered Karna's chariot.  Arjuna’s arrows killed many of Karna's soldiers.

Arjuna and Karna continued to fight fiercely, each shooting many arrows. Arjuna broke his bowstring! Karna took advantage and shot many arrows at Arjuna and his friends. But Arjuna was soon able to regain the upper hand. He shot even more powerful arrows!

Karna fought bravely, but he was hurt badly.  Arjuna’s arrows hit him and his chariot, soldiers, and friends. Karna's friends left him.  He was all alone.  Even though he was hurt and alone, Karna still fought.  He was a very brave warrior.  
