Once upon a time, during a great battle, a strong warrior named Bhurisravas was about to cut off Satyaki's head.  But before he could, Arjuna, a very skilled warrior, secretly chopped off Bhurisravas's arm!  The arm fell to the ground, like a snake with five heads.  Bhurisravas was very angry.

"Arjuna," he shouted, "That was unfair! You cut off my arm when I wasn't even fighting you!"

Bhurisravas complained that Arjuna was a better warrior than anyone, he knew all the rules of battle, but he broke them. He said that good warriors don't attack people who aren't ready to fight, or who are scared. He called Arjuna's actions mean and dishonorable. He said Arjuna was a bad influence from his friends, the Vrishnis, who were known for cheating.

Arjuna explained, "I know the rules of battle, but I had to protect Satyaki! He's my friend, and he was about to be killed. It's my duty to protect my friends. The battle was a big mess, with lots of fighting happening all around.  I couldn't just watch Satyaki get hurt." He also said Bhurisravas was being unfair because he was trying to kill Satyaki who wasn't ready.

After arguing, Bhurisravas decided to end his life in a special way, by lying down on a bed of arrows and peacefully leaving the battlefield.  Lots of people praised Bhurisravas for his bravery, but they blamed Arjuna and Krishna.  Arjuna felt sad, and tried to remind everyone that he had a special promise to protect his friends.  He pointed out the unfairness of how the Kauravas had killed a young boy earlier.

Satyaki, still angry, wanted to cut off Bhurisravas's head, even though he was already dying.  But everyone stopped him.  Even though Satyaki did it, many people thought it was wrong to kill a warrior who was already giving up.  They said it was fate, that Bhurisravas was meant to die.

Satyaki defended himself, saying the Kauravas were hypocrites, that they had been unfair in other battles, and that he had made a promise to kill anyone who defeated him and disrespected him. Bhurisravas was already close to dying, and Arjuna only cut off his arm.  Arjuna protected Satyaki and followed his vow.

In the end, everyone agreed that Bhurisravas was a brave warrior, and he went to a peaceful place after death. No one could decide if Satyaki and Arjuna had done right, and so many people were upset by the events.
