Sanjaya, the storyteller, began, "King Yudhishthira said happy things.  Then Krishna, a very good man, talked to Arjuna. But Arjuna felt sad because he thought he’d done something wrong.  Krishna smiled and said, 'Arjuna, imagine if you had actually killed Yudhishthira with your sword!  You’re just sad because you *said* something wrong, not because you *did* something wrong!  What would you have done then?'"

Krishna continued, "Arjuna, it's hard to know what's right and wrong sometimes.  If you had killed your brother, you’d be very, very sad, and you’d go to a bad place.  Make Yudhishthira happy. That’s what I want.  Then we can fight Karna."  Krishna added, "Arjuna, kill Karna today! That will make Yudhishthira very happy.”

Arjuna felt ashamed. He bowed down to Yudhishthira’s feet and said, "Forgive me, King! I only said those things because I wanted to do what was right."

Sanjaya said, "Yudhishthira saw his brother crying. He hugged Arjuna and cried too.  Soon, they felt better." Yudhishthira then said, "Arjuna, Karna hurt me badly in battle. He broke my armor, my bow, and even my chariot! I’m so sad! If you don’t kill Karna today, I don't want to live!"

Arjuna said, "I promise, King! By all that is holy, by my brothers, I will kill Karna today, or I will die trying!  I promise you on my weapons!”

Arjuna then told Krishna, "I’ll kill Karna! With your help, I can do it!" Krishna said, "You are strong enough, Arjuna. I always knew you could do it.”  Then Krishna told Yudhishthira, "Please tell Arjuna to kill Karna. We came to see if you were alright. We’re so happy you’re not hurt!  Tell Arjuna we are with him!"

Yudhishthira said, "Arjuna, my brother, come here and hug me.  I forgive you.  Go and kill Karna!"

Arjuna bowed to Yudhishthira and hugged him tightly. Yudhishthira said, "Arjuna, you have honored me.  May you always be strong and win!"

Arjuna said, “I'll fight Karna today! I will kill him and all his friends.  Karna hurt you, and he will pay for it. After I kill Karna, I’ll come back and stand behind you.  I swear it!”

Yudhishthira told Arjuna, "May you be famous and strong! May the gods bless you! Go quickly to battle and kill Karna, just like the god Indra killed the evil Vritra!”
