Arjuna, the mighty warrior, was attacked!  Arrows rained down on him.  He was hurt, but he didn't give up.  With his strong bow, he quickly broke the bows of his enemies.  Then, whoosh! He shot many arrows, and lots of enemy soldiers fell to the ground.

Some were bleeding. Some were missing arms or legs.  Some were dead.  Seeing his friends die, a king from the Trigartas jumped into the fight.  Thirty-two other soldiers followed him, attacking Arjuna all at once.  They shot many arrows, like a big rain cloud!

Arjuna got angry. He shot back sixty arrows, and defeated all of them. He felt happy, then he went to fight Bhishma.

Another king from the Trigartas attacked Arjuna again! But this time, Arjuna's friends, led by Sikhandin, helped him fight.  Arjuna fought bravely and defeated them. He then went to fight Bhishma, but first he had to fight Duryodhana and his friends.  

Arjuna was very strong!  He fought hard, and finally, went to face Bhishma. At the same time, Yudhishthira and his brothers, Bhima and the twins, went to fight too! Bhishma was a great warrior, but even he couldn't beat the Pandavas all together.

Jayadratha, another king, broke the bows of the Pandavas' soldiers.  Duryodhana also attacked the Pandavas, shooting fiery arrows at them. The Pandavas were hurt, but they fought back!

Sikhandin, one of the Pandava's soldiers, had his bow broken by Bhishma.  Another king was angry at Sikhandin and yelled, "You promised to kill Bhishma! Why aren't you fighting him?"

Sikhandin felt ashamed. He listened to the king’s words, and bravely went to fight Bhishma.  But Salya, another warrior, tried to stop him.  Sikhandin used a powerful magic weapon, and defeated Salya!

Bhishma broke Yudhishthira’s bow and flag! Yudhishthira was scared.  Bhima, angry and strong, dropped his bow and grabbed a club (a big stick). He went to fight Jayadratha. Jayadratha shot many arrows at Bhima, but Bhima didn't stop!  He killed all the horses of a Sindhu king!

Chitrasena, another soldier, tried to kill Bhima, but Bhima was very strong! He swung his club, and it was so powerful that it broke Chitrasena's chariot!  The Kaurava soldiers were scared and ran away. Everyone was amazed by Bhima's strength!
