Once upon a time, in a great battle, many brave warriors fought.  Bhima, a strong Pandava prince, fought bravely against Vikartana and Karna, mighty Kaurava warriors.  Karna was especially fierce, shooting many arrows and defeating many soldiers. Bhima fought like a wildfire through dry grass, but he had to avoid Karna.

Karna was also very strong! He defeated thousands of soldiers from the Pandava side.  Three great warriors, Arjuna, Bhima, and Karna, fought hard, defeating many soldiers. Because of a bad plan, many brave soldiers were hurt.

Duryodhana, the Kaurava prince, was angry. He shot many arrows at Nakula and Sahadeva, the Pandava twins. Nakula and Sahadeva fought back, shooting many arrows at Duryodhana. Duryodhana broke their bows, but they quickly got new ones and shot even more arrows! They fought like a storm, showering arrows on Duryodhana.  Duryodhana fought back fiercely, but the twins were very strong.

Then, Dhrishtadyumna, the Pancala prince, joined the battle. He fought against Duryodhana, who shot many arrows. Dhrishtadyumna bravely fought back, even after he was hit many times. He broke Duryodhana’s bow, and then he quickly got a new one. Then he broke Duryodhana's chariot! Duryodhana's brothers quickly rescued him from the battle.

Meanwhile, Karna fought Satyaki. Satyaki chased Karna, shooting arrows at him.  Karna fought back very hard, killing many soldiers, especially Pancala soldiers. He was a fearsome warrior!  He killed many brave soldiers. The battlefield was filled with dead elephants, horses, and soldiers.  No one had ever fought like Karna!  He was like a lion hunting deer!

Seeing Karna's power, Yudhishthira and many other Pandava warriors attacked him.  Karna fought all of them by himself, like a brave eagle!  Bhima, meanwhile, was fighting many other Kaurava soldiers. He killed many of them! The ground was covered with dead soldiers and animals! Duryodhana's army was scared and looked sad.

Arjuna, the greatest Pandava warrior, saw Karna causing trouble.  He asked Krishna to help him defeat Karna. Krishna and Arjuna fought bravely, defeating many Kaurava soldiers.  Their chariot was like a bright light cutting through the darkness.

Duryodhana sent more soldiers to fight Arjuna, but Arjuna was too strong! He defeated all the soldiers, one by one.  He was like a storm.

Then, Ashwatthama, Drona’s son, came to fight Arjuna and Krishna. Ashwatthama was a powerful warrior. He showered them with arrows. He was so strong that Arjuna felt scared.  Krishna encouraged Arjuna to fight harder.

Arjuna fought back bravely. He destroyed Ashwatthama's chariot and weapons. He even wounded Ashwatthama.  Ashwatthama’s driver helped him escape.

Meanwhile, Vijaya killed many Kaurava soldiers. The battle was very fierce! Many soldiers died.  The Pandavas won many battles that day. Yudhishthira was hurt, and had to rest.  The battle was long and hard, but the Pandavas were very brave.
