Once upon a time, the gods were very scared.  A powerful demon named Taraka was hurting them and the wise saints.  They went to Brahma, the creator god, for help.  "Please, Brahma," they begged, "Taraka is too strong!  Only you can make him stop!"

Brahma said, "I treat everyone fairly. But Taraka's actions are wrong. He must be defeated.  The sacred teachings must be protected!"

The gods were worried.  "But Brahma gave Taraka a magical gift," they explained. "The gift made Taraka impossible to kill by any god, demon, or monster!  And there's another problem. A powerful goddess cursed us long ago.  Because of her curse, we can't have any children!"

Brahma had a plan.  "Agni, the fire god, wasn't there when the curse was given," he said. "Agni will have a son who will defeat Taraka. This son will be stronger than any god, demon, monster, or human. He will have a magical weapon that can't be stopped."

The gods searched everywhere for Agni, but he had hidden himself. A frog, who had been burnt by Agni's power, told the gods where to find him.  But Agni was angry at the frog for betraying him, so he cursed all frogs to lose their sense of taste.

Then, a big elephant told the gods that Agni was hiding in a special tree.  Agni, upset with the elephant, cursed all elephants to have their trunks bent backwards.

Finally, a parrot revealed Agni's hiding place in another tree.  Agni cursed all parrots to lose their ability to speak, but then, feeling sorry, gave them a little bit of speech back, just the sound "K."  The gods made this tree very special for making fire in their ceremonies.

The gods finally found Agni. They asked him for help. Agni agreed. He went to the holy river Ganga. He put his magical power into the river, hoping she would have a son.

Ganga was so scared by a loud demon's roar that she couldn't hold Agni’s power and released it onto Mount Meru.  The power became a glowing baby.  A kind star group, the Krittikas, took care of the baby and nursed him.  They called him Kartikeya. Because the baby's power came from Agni (who is connected to Rudra, a powerful god), he was also called Skanda. Because he was born in a secret place, among reeds, he was also called Guha.

Kartikeya grew up strong and powerful.  The gods chose him to lead their army. Kartikeya defeated Taraka and many other demons.

Brahma also explained another story about the birth of many important people. He told how, at a great sacrifice, he created many wise people and gods from his own power.  One of these gods, Agni, was also the source of gold. Brahma said that giving away gold was a very good thing to do, because it was like giving away the power of the gods themselves!  It would bring good luck and forgiveness for sins.

And so, the gods were saved, thanks to Agni's son Kartikeya and the power of gold.
