Once upon a time, after a big battle in the Mahabharata, many brave warriors were killed while they were sleeping.  King Yudhishthira was very sad. He asked Krishna, a wise friend, "How could Ashvatthama, who wasn't even that good a fighter, kill all my sons?  They were amazing warriors! How could he defeat Drupada's sons, who were super strong and brave?  He even killed Dhrishtadyumna, a warrior so powerful, even Drona, a great archer, was afraid of him! How did Ashvatthama do it all by himself?"

Krishna explained, "Ashvatthama asked Mahadeva, the greatest god, for help. Mahadeva is so powerful, he can even give someone the gift of never dying! He can make anyone incredibly strong.  Mahadeva is the beginning, middle, and end of everything. The whole world works because of him.

A long, long time ago, Brahma, the creator god, wanted to make all the animals and people. He asked Rudra (another name for Mahadeva) to do it. Rudra went into the water and thought hard about how to make living things.  He waited a long time.  Brahma, waiting impatiently, made another being to help! This new being said, "If I'm the first, I'll create everything!" Brahma said, "You are the first! Rudra's still in the water."  So, the new being made lots of animals and people.  He made Daksha, the very first one.  But the creatures were hungry and wanted to eat their creator!  Scared, the new being asked Brahma for help. Brahma gave the animals plants and other things to eat. Strong animals could eat weaker ones.  Everyone was happy and started having babies.

After a while, Rudra came out of the water. He saw all the animals and people. He was angry because someone else had done his job!  He was so upset, he made a part of himself disappear. Brahma comforted him and asked why he was angry. Rudra said, "Someone else created everything! My part isn't needed anymore!  But I made the plants and food for everyone, through my hard work." Then Rudra, still angry, went away to be alone and think.

That's why Ashvatthama was so strong," Krishna finished. "Mahadeva's power helped him win the battle."
