King Dhritarashtra asked, "Sanjaya, tell me!  What happened between Arjuna (Partha) and King Bhagadatta?  It was a big fight!"

Sanjaya said, "It was a scary battle!  Bhagadatta, on his elephant, shot many sharp, black iron arrows at Arjuna and Krishna.  They were like fiery darts!  They even went through Krishna!

Arjuna wasn't scared.  He chopped off Bhagadatta's bow! Then he fought Bhagadatta's bodyguard and easily defeated him.  Bhagadatta threw fourteen shiny spears at Arjuna, but Arjuna broke each one into three pieces!

Arjuna then shot many arrows at Bhagadatta's elephant.  He tore the elephant's armor to pieces!  The elephant, without its armor, looked sad and wounded, like a mountain without clouds.

Bhagadatta threw an iron spear at Krishna, but Arjuna cut it in half!  Arjuna then hit Bhagadatta with ten arrows, even while smiling!

Bhagadatta got very angry. He threw more spears and knocked Arjuna's crown off!  Arjuna put his crown back on and said,  "Look around at this world!"

Bhagadatta got even angrier! He shot many more arrows.  Arjuna broke Bhagadatta’s bow and quiver, then shot him seventy-two times!  Bhagadatta was in a lot of pain.

Then, Bhagadatta threw a super special weapon—a magic hook—at Arjuna! But Krishna caught it! It protected Arjuna.

Arjuna was mad at Krishna.  He said, “You promised to only guide my chariot, not fight! Why did you catch the weapon? I can fight myself!”

Krishna explained, "I have four forms. One form helps people be good, another watches the world, another helps people, and one sleeps for a thousand years.  Long ago, Earth asked me for a special boon for her son, Naraka—to make him impossible to kill with this very weapon!  Bhagadatta got this magic weapon from Naraka. I caught it to help you, even if it meant breaking my promise. Now, defeat him!"

Arjuna listened and shot many arrows at Bhagadatta. He then shot a huge arrow that split Bhagadatta's elephant in two! The elephant fell down dead.  Then Arjuna shot one final arrow into Bhagadatta's chest.  Bhagadatta fell from his elephant, and the battle was over. Arjuna had won!"
