Once upon a time, during a great war, a brave prince named Dhrishtadyumna wanted to defeat the powerful teacher Drona.  He aimed his bow and shot many arrows at Drona's chariot.  Dhrishtadyumna's friends, the Pandavas, helped him fight. Drona's son and his friends fought hard to protect him.  It was a huge battle, like two stormy oceans crashing together!

Dhrishtadyumna hit Drona with five arrows, and Drona roared back, shooting twenty-five arrows! He even broke Dhrishtadyumna's bow.  Angry, Dhrishtadyumna grabbed a new bow and shot a super-powerful arrow that shone like the sun.  But a strong warrior named Karna sliced the arrow into pieces before it could hit Drona.

Many warriors then attacked Dhrishtadyumna.  Drona, his son, Karna, and others shot many arrows at him.  Dhrishtadyumna fought back bravely, hitting them all!  He fought especially hard with another warrior, Drumasena.  They shot arrows at each other until Dhrishtadyumna cut off Drumasena's head.

Then, Karna got really angry and shot lots and lots of arrows at Dhrishtadyumna.  Many other warriors joined him to try and defeat Dhrishtadyumna. It looked like Dhrishtadyumna was in big trouble.

Meanwhile, another brave warrior, Satyaki, came to help.  Satyaki and Karna fought fiercely, shooting many arrows at each other.  Karna's son, Vrishasena, was killed in the fight. Karna was very sad and very angry!

While all this was happening, the sound of Arjuna's bow, Gandiva, was heard across the battlefield.  Karna told Duryodhana that Arjuna, a super-strong warrior, was coming and that they needed to defeat Satyaki and Dhrishtadyumna quickly to win the battle. They needed to win because Arjuna was very powerful. He was destroying their army!

Duryodhana told his uncle, Sakuni, to attack the Pandavas.  A huge battle started again, with many warriors fighting on both sides. The night was filled with the sounds of arrows flying, chariots rumbling, and warriors shouting.  The battle between the two armies raged on.
