Once upon a time, during a great battle, Bhima, a strong Pandava warrior, defeated Karna, a mighty warrior fighting for the Kauravas.  Dhritarashtra, the blind king of the Kauravas, was worried.  His son, Duryodhana, always said that only Karna could defeat the Pandavas.

When Duryodhana saw Karna losing, he shouted, "Quick! Protect Karna! He's in big trouble!"

Many Kaurava princes rushed to help, like moths to a flame. They were Srutarvan, Durddhara, and many more. They showered Bhima with arrows.

But Bhima was super strong! He quickly defeated many of them.  He killed Vivitsu with one arrow. Then, he killed Vikata and Saha.  Next, he defeated Kratha, Nanda, and Upananda.  The Kaurava princes were scared and ran away.

Karna, feeling sad, charged back at Bhima.  They fought fiercely, like two angry lions!  Bhima threw many arrows at Karna. Karna, also a great archer, shot back with many sharp arrows.  He even broke Bhima's bow!

Bhima then threw a giant spiked club at Karna. Karna cut the club into pieces with his arrows.  Bhima got a new bow and shot more arrows.  Karna shot three arrows, hitting Bhima hard.  Bhima, strong as ever, shot an arrow that pierced Karna's armor and went deep into his body.  Karna was in pain!  He shook like a mountain during an earthquake.  He got angry and shot many arrows back.  He even knocked Bhima's chariot apart!

Bhima jumped off his broken chariot and started fighting on foot. He smashed hundreds of elephants and soldiers with his mighty club.  The Kaurava army was in chaos!

Karna then went after Yudhishthira, the leader of the Pandavas. But Bhima's friend, Satyaki, helped, and they fought Karna together.  The arrows flew everywhere, so thick that the sun was almost hidden!

More Kaurava warriors joined the fight. The battle became a huge, noisy mess.  Everyone shouted and fought bravely.  Dhritarashtra listened to Sanjaya, who described the battle's terrible fury. It was a very scary and loud battle, filled with many brave warriors.
