King Dhritarashtra was very sad.  All his sons were dead. He cried and cried.  He waved his arms and sighed like smoke was coming out of him.

"Oh, Suta," he said, "I'm heartbroken! You said the Pandavas are safe.  My heart is like a stone; it doesn't break even though all my sons are gone. I never saw them because I'm blind, but I loved them so much. I was so happy when they grew up.  Now, they're all dead! My brave son Duryodhana, where are you?  You were my protector.  Without you, what will I do? You, the strongest warrior, are lying on the ground, just like any ordinary king.  Who will call me 'Father'? Who will hug me and ask for my orders? Duryodhana always said, 'Father, this whole earth is ours!' He gathered many brave kings to fight for him: Bhagadatta, Kripa, Shalya, and many more!  He said he and Karna would defeat the Pandavas.  I believed him.  But it was destiny. "

Dhritarashtra kept talking. He said it was fate that his brave warriors, like Bhishma, Drona, and Karna, were killed.  One by one, he named all the great heroes who died:  Bhurishrava, Somadatta, Bhagadatta, Jayadratha… so many more!  Even Shakuni and his brave warriors were gone.  "It was fate," he cried. "Good people have good luck, but I have bad luck. My sons are all gone. I'm too old to fight the enemies. I will go live in the forest."

He was very upset about his sons' deaths. He wondered how he could bear to hear Bhimasena talk about killing his sons.

Then Dhritarashtra asked Sanjaya, his charioteer, "After Bhishma and Drona and Karna died, who led our army? The Pandavas kept killing our leaders.  They killed Bhishma, Drona, and Karna right in front of everyone! Vidura warned me long ago that Duryodhana would cause great trouble. I was foolish and didn't listen. Now, it's too late. Tell me, Sanjaya, who led the army after Karna died?  How did Duryodhana die? How did the Pandavas win? Tell me everything! You're a great storyteller." Dhritarashtra was heartbroken and wanted to know all the details of the terrible war.
