The Great Battle: A Story from the Mahabharata

King Dhritarashtra was worried.  His army was losing badly!  The Pandavas, led by the strong Bhima and the clever Yudhishthira, were winning.  "Sanjaya," he cried, "tell me what happened!"

Sanjaya, his advisor, said, "King, when Bhima charged,  Karna, a brave warrior on your side, rushed to help.  He rallied your soldiers. But the Pandavas fought back hard! Bhima, Shikhandi, Dhrishtadyumna, and many others attacked your army.  It was a huge battle!  Lots of chariots, elephants, and soldiers crashed together.

Shikhandi fought Karna. Dhrishtadyumna fought Duhshasana. Nakula fought Vrishasena. Yudhishthira fought Citrasena.  Sahadeva fought Uluka. Satyaki fought Shakuni.  Draupadi's sons fought other Kauravas.  Ashvatthama fought Arjuna.  Kripa fought Yudhamanyu.  And Kritavarma fought Uttamauja.  Bhima, all by himself, fought many Kaurava soldiers!

Shikhandi and Karna fought fiercely. Karna hit Shikhandi three times on the forehead.  Shikhandi, even with arrows in his head, kept fighting! He shot Karna many times.  Karna then broke Shikhandi's chariot. Shikhandi fought bravely, but had to leave the battle.

Karna then pushed the Pandavas back. Meanwhile, Dhrishtadyumna and Duhshasana fought too! They kept shooting arrows at each other.  Duhshasana was very strong. He hit Dhrishtadyumna. But Dhrishtadyumna broke Duhshasana’s bow!  Duhshasana got a new bow and kept fighting. Everyone watched in amazement!

Nakula and Vrishasena also fought hard, shooting many arrows at each other.  Sahadeva fought Uluka, and killed Uluka's horses and driver.  Uluka ran away. Satyaki fought Shakuni and also broke his chariot and his bow. Shakuni also ran away.

Bhima fought bravely. He defeated many soldiers and made one of Dhritarashtra’s sons run away!  The whole Kuru army then attacked Bhima!

Yudhamanyu and Kripa fought. Kripa broke Yudhamanyu's chariot parts, so he had to stop. Uttamauja and Kritavarma fought a very big battle. Kritavarma hit Uttamauja, who had to leave the battle.  Then the whole Kuru army attacked Bhima again!  Duhshasana and Shakuni’s men surrounded Bhima. Bhima was furious!

He used his magic weapons! He fought many elephants.  He was so strong, he threw arrows everywhere. He smashed many elephants.  It was like a huge storm!  The elephants ran away, bleeding and hurt.  Bhima was incredibly strong and brave.  He was like a god!"
