Once upon a time, two wise men, Bharadwaja and Bhrigu, were talking. Bharadwaja was puzzled.  "If the gods made lots of things," he said, "why do we only call the five main things – earth, water, fire, air, and space – 'great creatures'?"

Bhrigu smiled. "Everything big and all-around gets called 'great'," he explained.  "Think about it: air is movement, space is sound, fire is heat, water is, well, water, and earth makes up our bones and bodies.  Everything, even you and me, is made of these five things! Our senses are made of them too.  Our ears hear because of space, our noses smell because of earth, our tongues taste because of water, our skin feels things because of air, and our eyes see because of fire."

Bharadwaja wasn't sure. "But trees!" he said. "They don't seem to have any fire (heat), air (movement), or water.  They don't hear, see, smell, or taste. How can they be made of these five things?"

Bhrigu chuckled. "Trees are clever! They have space inside them – think of all the air inside their trunks! They have heat, too.  Ever noticed how their leaves droop on a hot day? That's the heat!  When it's windy or stormy, their leaves and fruit fall – that's the sound.  Creepers wind around trees – they wouldn't do that if trees couldn't 'see' where to go!  Trees drink water through their roots, just like you drink from a straw. They get sick, and they get better. They even grow taller and stronger – that shows they feel things and are alive!"

Bhrigu explained further, "Everything living and not living has these five things inside it, but in different amounts. Your body is made of them, too!  Your bones are earth, your energy is fire, your belly is space, your blood is water, and your breath is air.  We all live and grow because of these five things working together."

Bhrigu continued, "Things like smell, taste, sight, touch, and sound are all ways these five things show themselves.  Smells are all about earth, taste is water, sight is fire, touch is air, and sound is space. All those things, from the softest whisper to the loudest thunder, are different kinds of sound."

Bharadwaja finally understood. Even though it wasn't always obvious, everything in the world – people, trees, and everything else – was made of these amazing five things.
