Yudhishthira, the kind prince, talked to his friend Sanjaya.  "Sanjaya," he said, "why do you think there will be a war?  Peace is much better than war! Nobody wants to fight if they can help it.  Imagine having everything you want without lifting a finger! Nobody would choose to work, let alone go to war!  War is terrible!"

Yudhishthira explained, "My brothers and I want to be happy, but we always do what's right. We only want happiness that comes from being good.  If you always chase after what you want, you'll never be happy. It’s like adding fuel to a fire – it just burns bigger! King Dhritarashtra has so much, yet he's unhappy.  Unhappy people don't enjoy music, nice clothes, or pretty smells."

"We lost our home because we were unlucky," Yudhishthira continued. "But even though things are tough, we don't want to hurt anyone. King Dhritarashtra is in trouble, so he relies on others for help. That’s not wise.  He should treat others the way he wants to be treated."

Yudhishthira told Sanjaya a story: "It's like lighting a fire in a forest.  If the wind blows, the fire spreads and causes trouble! King Dhritarashtra is unhappy because he listened to his bad son, Duryodhana.  Duryodhana ignored Vidura, his wisest advisor, just like he ignored his good advice."

"Dhritarashtra loves his son so much that he ignores Vidura’s wisdom," Yudhishthira said sadly. "Duryodhana is mean, selfish, and angry. He only cares about himself!  Because of his son, Dhritarashtra is choosing to be unkind."

"Even during the dice game," Yudhishthira recalled, "I knew trouble was coming.  Vidura gave good advice, but Dhritarashtra didn't listen. As long as they listened to Vidura, everything was fine. But now Duryodhana's advisors are Dussasana, Sakuni, and Karna – they are not good people!"

"With Vidura gone and Dhritarashtra on the throne, there can't be peace," Yudhishthira sighed. "Duryodhana wants all the power. He thinks he can defeat Arjuna, our best warrior, but he's wrong. Even if Karna helps him. Many great warriors know Arjuna is the best archer. Duryodhana got the throne unfairly, while Arjuna was alive."

"Duryodhana thinks he's won, but he hasn't seen Bhima's anger yet!" Yudhishthira exclaimed. "Even the powerful god Indra wouldn't dare take our kingdom while Bhima, Arjuna, Nakula, and Sahadeva are alive! Dhritarashtra and his son are making a big mistake."

"You know our suffering, Sanjaya," Yudhishthira said. "I'd forgive them, but... you know how things are.  Let's keep things peaceful.  Give me Indraprastha back – Duryodhana should give it to me."
