One day, a HUGE battle began!  The Kuru and Pandava armies shouted and roared like lions, ready to fight.  The sounds were amazing – horns blowing, war drums booming, arrows whizzing, elephants trumpeting, and horses neighing!  It was so loud, it made everyone’s hair stand on end!

The Kurus, brave but mean, charged at the Pandavas.  Bhishma, a great warrior, attacked Arjuna. Arjuna, with his powerful bow Gandiva, fought back! They were both amazing fighters, trying to defeat each other.  But neither could win easily!

Satyaki fought Kritavarman. They hit each other with so many arrows, they looked like beautiful flowering trees! Abhimanyu fought Vrihadvala. Vrihadvala broke Abhimanyu’s chariot, but Abhimanyu got angry and fought back hard!

Bhima fought Duryodhana.  They showered each other with arrows!  Everyone watched in amazement. Nakula fought Dussasana.  They broke each other’s bows and arrows.  Sahadeva fought Durmukha. They were fierce and brave, trying to defeat one another.

King Yudhishthira fought a king from Madras.  The Madras king broke Yudhishthira’s bow, but Yudhishthira quickly grabbed a new one and fought back!  Dhrishtadyumna fought Drona.  Drona was strong, but Dhrishtadyumna kept fighting bravely.

Sankha fought Somadatta’s son. They hurt each other badly. Dhrishtaketu fought Valhika.  They roared like angry elephants, each trying to defeat the other.

Ghatotkacha, a powerful warrior, fought Alamvusha, a scary demon! They hit each other with tons of arrows! Sikhandin fought Aswatthaman, Drona’s son. They fought fiercely, hitting each other again and again.

Virata fought Bhagadatta. They both fired lots of arrows! Kripa fought Vrihadkshatra.  They broke each other’s chariots and then fought with swords!  Drupada fought Jayadratha.  Their fight was as amazing as a fight between two stars!

Vikarna fought Sutasoma. Neither could win! Chekitana fought Susarman.  They both shot many arrows. Sakuni fought Prativindhya. They hit each other with powerful arrows. Srutakarman fought Sudakshina.  Sudakshina was strong, but Srutakarman kept fighting bravely.

Iravan fought Srutayush. Iravan was very strong and defeated Srutayush’s horses! Vinda and Anuvinda fought Kuntibhoja. They fought bravely, even against a big army. The Kekaya brothers fought the Gandhara princes.

Viravahu fought Uttara.  They hurt each other badly. The ruler of the Chedis fought Uluka.  They both fought hard and neither could win easily!

Thousands of warriors fought! Elephants crashed against elephants, chariots crashed against chariots, and soldiers fought on foot and on horseback!  It was a huge, messy, and scary battle.  Even the gods watched in amazement, saying it was like a fight between the gods and the demons! The battle was so chaotic, it was hard to see what was happening.
