Once upon a time, after a messenger named Sanjaya left the Pandavas, the five brothers who were rightful kings,  Yudhishthira, the eldest and wisest, spoke to his best friend, Krishna.  Yudhishthira said, "Krishna, we need your help!  We asked for only five small villages back from our cousins, the Kauravas, led by the mean Duryodhana. But they refused!  They're so greedy and proud!"

Krishna, a very powerful and kind god, said, "Don't worry, Yudhishthira!  Tell me what you need."

Yudhishthira explained, "Dhritarashtra, the Kauravas' father,  pretended to be nice.  He made us live in the forest for twelve years, and then hide for a whole year.  But he never truly intended to give us back what was rightfully ours.  He listens to Duryodhana, who is wicked and only cares about himself. We are suffering!  We don't even have enough food to eat!"

Yudhishthira talked about how being poor is terrible. It makes people lose their goodness and even their families don’t want to be around them. He said it was much worse than dying because at least in death you are free from worry.

Yudhishthira continued, "We don't want a war.  We have many relatives among the Kauravas, and fighting will hurt everyone. But we can't just give up our right to our kingdom!"

Krishna said, "I'll go talk to the Kauravas. I'll try to make peace. If I can't, then we'll have to fight.”

Yudhishthira worried, "Krishna, Duryodhana might hurt you! Please be careful!"

Krishna said, "I'm very powerful.  Even if they try to hurt me, I'll be fine.  But if I can make peace, it will be wonderful for everyone. If not, then we will fight, and no one will stop us."

Yudhishthira said, "Go, Krishna.  We trust you.  Do what you think is best to bring peace, even if it means making tough choices.  You know what's fair, and you know what to do."


So, Krishna, the kind and powerful friend, went to speak with the Kauravas, hoping to bring peace and solve the problem. But whether peace would come, or a great war would begin, remained to be seen.
