King Yudhishthira was worried.  He had no friends, many enemies, no money, and a tiny army!  He asked his wise grandfather, Bhishma, "What should a king do when things are so bad?"

Bhishma said, "That's a tough question, Yudhishthira!  It's like a puzzle."  Bhishma explained that doing what's right isn't always easy. Sometimes, you have to do things that aren't perfectly good to survive.

Imagine a desert with no water, Bhishma said.  A king needs to fill his treasury, even if it means doing things that aren't completely fair.  It's like finding water in that desert – you have to do what you have to do.

Bhishma said that a king's most important job is to protect his people.  If he’s weak, he can’t protect them.  So, sometimes, he might need to get money in ways he wouldn't normally, like taking it from rich people who aren't Brahmins (priests) or ascetics (holy people who live simply).  It’s like someone escaping a burning building – they might take a dangerous path to get out.

But Bhishma warned that after the hard times are over, the king needs to do good things again to make up for what he did. He must always try his best to be good.

Bhishma gave examples.  A big tree is cut down for a special ceremony, and other trees get hurt in the process.  Similarly, a king might have to hurt others to protect his kingdom.  

He said a king’s kingdom and treasury are like the roots of a big tree. The treasury helps the army, the army helps the kingdom, and the kingdom supports the king. A king should always protect his people, and the people should protect him.  He should never give up hope.

Bhishma also said that even holy people sometimes have to do things that aren't perfect when they are in trouble. A king needs wealth to be strong and protect his people. Getting that wealth might mean doing things that aren't completely fair, but it's okay if it's only for a short time, to help everyone in the end. The most important thing is for the king to be strong enough to protect his kingdom.
