"Yudhishthira said, 'Do thou discourse to me once again, O grandsire,
upon the merits attaching to gifts of sesame and of lamps for lighting
darkness, as also of food and robes.'

"Bhishma said, 'In this connection, O Yudhishthira, is recited the
narrative of the discourse that took place in ancient times between a
Brahmana and Yama. In the country lying between the rivers Ganga and
Yamuna, at the foot of the hills called Yamuna, there was a large town
inhabited by Brahmanas. The town was celebrated under the name of
Parnasala and was very delightful in appearance, O king. A large number
of learned Brahmanas lived in it. One day, Yama, the ruler of the dead,
commanded a messenger of his, who was clad in black, endued with
blood-red eyes and hair standing erect, and possessed of feet, eyes, and
nose all of which resembled those of a crow, saying, 'Go thou to the town
inhabited by Brahmanas and bring hither the person known by the name of
Sarmin and belonging by birth to the race of Agastya. He is intent on
mental tranquillity and possessed of learning. He is a preceptor engaged
in teaching the Vedas and his practices are well-known. Do not bring me
another person belonging to the same race and living in the same
neighbourhood. This other man is equal unto him I want, in virtues,
study, and birth. With respect to children and conduct, this other
resembles the intelligent Sarmin. Do thou bring the individual I have in
view. He should be worshipped with respect (instead of being dragged
hither with irreverence).' The messenger having come to the place, did
the very reverse of what he had been bidden to do. Attacking that person,
he brought him who had been forbidden by Yama to be brought. Possessed of
great energy, Yama rose up at the sight of the Brahmana and worshipped
him duly. The king of the dead then commanded his messenger, saying, 'Let
this one be taken back, and let the other one be brought to me.' When the
great judge of the dead said these words, that Brahmana addressed him and
said, 'I have completed my study of the Vedas and am no longer attached
to the world. Whatever period may yet remain of my mortal existence, I
wish to pass, dwelling even here, O thou of unfading glory!


"Yama said, 'I cannot ascertain the exact period, ordained by Time, of
one's life, and hence, unurged by Time, I cannot allow one to take up
one's residence here. I take note of the acts of righteousness (or
otherwise) that one does in the world. Do thou, O learned Brahmana of
great splendour return immediately to thy abode. 'I ell me what also is
in thy mind and what I can do for thee, O thou of unfading glory!'

"The Brahmana said, 'Do thou tell me what those acts are by accomplishing
which one may earn great merit. O best of all beings, thou art the
foremost of authorities (on the subject) even in the three worlds.'

"Yama said, 'Do thou hear, O regenerate Rishi, the excellent ordinances
regarding gifts. The gift of sesame seeds is a very superior one. It
produces everlasting merit. O foremost of regenerate ones, one should
make gifts of as much sesame as one can. By making gifts of sesame every
day, one is sure to attain the fruition of one's every wish. The gift of
sesame at Sraddhas is applauded. Verily the gift of sesame is a very
superior one. Do thou make gifts of sesame unto the Brahmanas according
to the rites ordained in the scriptures. One should on the day of the
full moon of the month of Vaisakha, make gilts of sesame unto the
Brahmanas. They should also be made to eat and to touch sesame on every
occasion that one can afford. They that are desirous of achieving what is
beneficial to them should, with their whole souls, do this in their
houses.
Without doubt, men should similarly make gifts of water and
establish resting places for the distribution of drinking water.
One
should cause tanks and lakes and wells to be excavated. Such acts are
rare in the world, O best of regenerate persons! Do thou always make
gifts of water. This act is fraught with great merit. O best of
regenerate persons, thou shouldst establish resting places along the
roads for the distribution of water. After one has eaten, the gift unto
one should especially be made of water for drink.'

"Bhishma continued, 'After Yama had said these words unto him, the
messenger who had borne him from his abode conveyed him back to it. The
Brahmana, on his return, obeyed the instructions he had received. Having
thus conveyed him back to his abode the messenger of Yama fetched Sarmin
who had really been sought by Yama. Taking Sarmin unto him, he informed
his master. Possessed of great energy, the judge of the dead worshipped
that righteous Brahmana, and having conversed with him a while dismissed
him for being taken back to his abode. Unto him also Yama gave the same
instructions. Sarmin, too, coming back into the world of men, did all
that Yama had said. Like the gift of water, Yama, from a desire of doing
good to the Pitris, applauds the gift of lamps to light dark places.
Hence, the giver of a lamp for lighting a dark place is regarded as
benefiting the Pitris. Hence, O best of the Bharatas, one should always
give lamps for lighting dark spots. The giving of lamps enhances the
visual power of the deities, the Pitris, and one's own self.
It has
been said, O king, that the gift of gems is a very superior gift. The
Brahmana, who, having accepted a gift of gems, sells the same for
performing a sacrifice, incurs no fault. The Brahmana, who, having
accepted a gift of gems makes a gift of them unto Brahmanas. acquires
inexhaustible merit himself and confers inexhaustible merit upon him from
whom he had originally received them. Conversant with every duty Manu
himself has said that he, who, observant of proper restraints, earns
makes a gift of gems unto a Brahmana observant of proper restraints earns
inexhaustible merit himself and confers inexhaustible merit upon the
recipient. The man who is content with his own wedded wife and who makes
a gift of robes, earns an excellent complexion and excellent vestments
for himself. I have told thee, O foremost of men, what the merits are
that attach to gifts of kine, of gold, and the sesame agreeably to
deserve precepts of the Vedas and the scriptures One should marry and
raise offspring upon one's wedded wives. Of all acquisitions, O son of
Kuru's race, that of male issue is regarded as the foremost.'"